- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science,
and science-based tools for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a Professor of
Neurobiology and Ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, I have the pleasure of
introducing Dr. Samer Hattar
as my guest on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
Dr. Hattar is the Chief of the Section
on Light and Circadian Rhythms
at the National Institute of Mental Health
in Bethesda, Maryland.
Dr. Hattar has many important
discoveries to his name.
He was one of a handful
of groups that discovered
the light sensing neurons in the eye
that set the circadian clock.
This is a fundamental discovery
made in the early 2000s
that has led to an enormous
number of additional discoveries
on how light regulates our
sleep, our immune system,
our mood, mental health,
metabolism, feeding,
and many other important processes.
If ever there was somebody who understands
how all of these processes interact
and can inform best practices
for our daily behaviors,
it's Dr. Hattar.
During our discussion today,
Dr. Hattar answers questions
that are absolutely
essential for us to know
about our health and wellbeing.
For instance, how to
align our sleep schedule
with our activity
schedule, such as exercise,
and how to align light,
activity and exercise
with our feeding rhythms.
He presents a new model
of how light, activity,
and feeding rhythms converge
to support optimal health.
And when those are not aligned correctly,
how our mental and
physical health can suffer.
It's a discussion that is rich
with scientific mechanism,
made clearly, of course, so
everybody can understand,
as well as specific
protocols to deal with shifts
in day length, shifts in activity,
and in order to optimize
sleep, metabolism,
and wellbeing of various kinds.
I learned so much from
Samer as I always do.
He is an absolute wealth of
knowledge on all things related
to light and circadian rhythms,
physiology, and neuroscience.
I don't think you'll find anyone else
as knowledgeable about
these topics as Samer.
And so, I'm delighted that he
joined us here on the podcast
to share this information.
Before we begin I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of
my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer
information about science
and science related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is ROKA.
ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've spent my career
working on the science
of the visual system and I can tell you
that one of the things
that our visual system
has to contend with is
adjusting so that when we go
from a very bright area
to a dim or shadowed area,
we can still see things clearly.
ROKA eyeglasses and
sunglasses were designed
with the science of the
visual system in mind.
And so they make those
transitions seamless.
You always see things
with crystal clarity.
Another great thing about these glasses
is that they're very lightweight,
so you don't even really remember
that they're on your face.
And they won't slip off if you get sweaty.
The glasses were designed
initially for running
and for cycling and for active wear,
but they work great for
that and they work great,
and they also happen
to look great for work,
if you go out to dinner,
for social settings,
so they can really be worn in
essentially any circumstances.
If you'd like to try ROKA glasses,
you can go to ROKA, that's R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code
"Huberman" to get 20% off
your first order.
That's ROKA.com, enter the
code "Huberman" at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer
in getting blood work done
for the simple reason
that many of the factors
that impact our immediate
and long-term health
can only be detected in
a quality blood test.
The problem with a lot of
blood tests out there, however,
is you get numbers back, but
you don't know what to do
about those numbers specifically.
ROKA has solved that problem
at a number of levels.
First of all, they make getting
the blood tests very easy.
They'll come to your house if you like,
or you can go to a local clinic.
Second of all, once you
get your numbers back,
there's a very easy to use
dashboard where you can identify
obviously what the numbers are,
but also the various
things that you can do
to bring those numbers into
the ranges that you want;
through either behavioral
practices like exercise,
through nutritional practices
or supplementation, et cetera.
So they made the whole thing
very easy start to finish,
in a way that allows you to
best direct your health goals.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can visit InsideTracker.com/Huberman
to get 25% off
any of InsideTracker's plans,
just use the code "Huberman" at checkout.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free,
keto-friendly cereal.
I am not ketogenic,
meaning I don't follow
a purely ketogenic diet.
I tend to fast in the
early part of the day,
I tend to eat kind of low carbish
through the middle of the day.
And then in the evening
I eat carbohydrates.
That's what works best for me,
and allows me to feel alert all day long,
and to sleep really well at night.
Magic Spoon is a terrific snack for me
because it tastes terrific;
it's got some sweetness,
but it doesn't take me out of
that state that I want to be in
during the day where I'm
sort of ketoish, I would say.
I'm not actually in ketosis,
but I'm following more
or less a low carb diet
during the day, which keeps me alert.
So either fasting or low carb,
and Magic Spoon is consistent with that.
And then as I mentioned
before in the evening,
I do eat carbohydrates.
Magic Spoon has zero grams of sugar,
13 to 14 grams of protein,
and only four net grams of
carbohydrates in each serving.
So I think it qualifies as
low carbish or low carb.
In addition, it only has
140 calories per serving.
It's also just delicious.
They have flavors like cocoa, fruity,
peanut butter, frosted.
I particularly liked the frosted one
because it tastes like donuts,
and I particularly like donuts.
Although I try not to eat
them too often if ever.
If you want to try Magic Spoon,
you can go to MagicSpoon.com/Huberman
to grab a variety pack.
You can use the promo code
"Huberman" at checkout,
and you'll get $5 off your order.
Again, that's MagicSpoon.com/Huberman,
and use the code "Huberman" to get $5 off.
And now, my conversation
with Dr. Samer Hattar.
Samer, thanks for sitting down with me.
- My pleasure.
- Yeah, we go way back.
So, you are best known
in scientific circles
for your work on how light
impacts mood, learning, feeding,
hunger, sleep, and these sorts of topics.
So, just to kick the ball out
onto the field, so to speak,
how does light impact the way we feel?
So, when I get up in the morning,
I have the opportunity
to interact with light
in certain ways or to avoid
light in certain ways.
I have the opportunity
to interact with sunlight
or with artificial light.
Maybe you could just wade us
into what the relationship is
between light and these things
like mood and hunger, et cetera.
- Sure.
So, I mean, you do appreciate the effect
of light for vision.
So, when you wake up in a beautiful area,
beautiful ocean, light is essential;
the sunrise, the sunset, blue
sky, beautiful mountains.
So, that's your conscious
perception of light,
but light has a completely
different aspect
that is independent of conscious vision
or image forming functions.
And that's how it regulates many important
functions in your body.
I think the best that is
well studied and well known
is your circadian clock.
And the word circadian
comes from the word circa,
which is approximate and diem is day.
So, it's an approximate day.
Why is it an approximate day?
Because if I put you or
any other human being
who have a normal circadian
clock in a constant conditions
with no information about
feeding time, about sleep time,
about what time it is outside,
you still have a daily rhythm,
but it's not exactly 24 hours.
So it will shift out of the solar day
because it's not exactly 24 hours,
and hence the name circadian.
- So, just to ask a quick
question about that.
When you say you have
this about 24 hour rhythm,
how does that rhythm show up
in the tissues of our body?
- Great question.
So, it shows up at every
level that we know we studied;
it shows up at the level of the cell.
It shows up at the level of the tissue,
and it shows up at your behavior.
The most obvious for you
is your sleep-wake cycle.
You sleep and you're awake and
sleep at the 24 hour rhythms.
And if you measure the
sleep-wake cycle of humans
who are maintaining constant conditions,
you will see that the period
length of the sleep rhythm
on average is more than 24 hours.
In humans it's 24.2 hours.
So you'll be drifting .2 hours every day
out of the solar day if
you don't get the sunlight.
So the sunlight adjusts
that approximate day
to an exact day, so now
your behavior is adjusted
to the light-dark
environment or the solar day.
- Okay, so if I understand correctly,
if I were to go into a cave-
- Yeah.
- Or I would to be
in constant light.
- Yeah.
- And I didn't close my eyes-
- In constant light,
that I would still sleep
in one coherent about.
- Yes.
- And I would still be
awake for more or less one
coherent about, maybe a nap.
- Yes.
- But the total duration
of my day, so to speak,
would be a little bit
longer than 24 hours?
- Perfect.
- But if I'm in a condition
like most people are where the sun goes up
and the sun goes down, and
I have some understanding
of that sunrise and sunset, then-
- You don't have the understanding,
you don't have to have
conscious understanding.
You have the detection.
- Right.
- So, circadian photoentrainment
is the word we use,
entraining the circadian clock
to the photic environment
is completely subconscious.
You're not aware of it.
It's not like vision or image forming,
where you actually know
what you're looking at.
So, it's all hypothalamic.
It's part of the brain that
is not consciously driven.
So, you actually do not
know when it happens
or when it doesn't happen.
And that's what we'll
get into when I tell you
why light affects your mood
and why sometimes people
don't know how to deal with light
to improve their mood, for example.
- Okay, so this is a subconscious vision.
- Yes.
- Okay.
Before you tell us about
how light impacts mood,
I'm curious, what is the
relevance of adjusting this clock
from a little bit longer
than 24 hours to 24 hours?
I mean, it seems like a small difference,
24 hours and 40 minutes or 24 hours.
Like what's the relevance?
I mean, why should we care
about that short difference?
- So, let's do the math.
If you shift out .2 hours a day,
in five days you're shifting out one hour.
So you're literally one hour off
in your social behavior in five days.
In 10 days, you're two hours off.
And if you're an organism
that is living in the wild,
shifting out of the
right phase of the cycle,
you could either miss food
or you could become food.
So it's really essential for survival.
I think it's one of the
strongest aspect of survival
for animals to have the anticipation
and the adjustment to the solar cycle.
- And for humans as well.
When you say animals, I'm
assuming that applies to us?
- Absolutely, yeah.
- I see.
So even though it's just a
short bit longer than 24,
if that accumulates over days,
then you could find yourself
very much out of phase
with the rest of your species essentially.
- Yeah, so let's say it's .2 hours.
So, in five days it's one hour.
In 25 days it could be five or six hours.
You could be in New
York and you're feeling
as if you traveled from
New York to London.
So, you would be having
jet lag in New York,
even though you didn't
do a jet lag travel.
So it's very important for the adjustment.
And if we have time,
maybe we could talk about
why this is important for seasonality,
because also it allows
animals to anticipate
the change in season.
And the more you're high
in the north or the south,
the more that these weather
changes occur very harshly,
and you have to be ready for them.
And that happens in us as well.
- All right, well, we will
definitely get into seasonality.
Okay, so we've got this
subconscious vision
that aligns us with the turn of the earth.
How does that work?
What is the machinery that
allows that to happen?
And how does that machinery work?
- Yeah, so, we knew that
in mammals, including us,
we are mammals, humans,
that the eyes are required
for this function.
So, if humans are born without eyes,
or the optic nerves are damaged,
humans are not able to
adjust to the solar cycle.
So we know that the eyes are required.
And since we thought we
knew about the eyes a lot
before 2000, we thought that-
- You say before the year 2000?
- Before the year 2000, yes.
- Mm hm, yep.
- We thought it's these
photoreceptors in your retina
that allow you to see.
So, in the human retinas,
there are two types of photoreceptors;
they are called rods and
cones because of their shapes.
And these rods and cones
simply take the photon energy,
which light is made of,
and they change it in a
way to an electrical signal
that allow us to build the
image of the environment
in our cortices.
- Subconsciously?
- Consciously in this situation
cause it's vision, right?
It's image forming vision,
it's a visual cortex,
and associative cortices,
which allow you to build
conscious perception of the environment.
However, people have found,
including me with the work
of David Berson and Ignacio Provencio,
that there is a subset of ganglion cells.
The ganglion cells are the
cells that leave the retina,
their axon leave the retina
and project to the brain.
So these were thought to only
relay rod and cone information
from the light environment to the brain.
We found that a small subset
of these ganglion cells
are themselves photoreceptors
that were completely
missed in the retina.
And these are the photoreceptors
that relay light
environment subconsciously
to the areas in the
brain that have and house
the circadian clock or
the circadian pacemaker,
which adjusts all the clocks in our bodies
to the central brain clock
that allows them to entrain
to the 24 hour light-dark cycle.
- Incredible.
So, as I recall 'cause I was a
graduate student at the time,
in the year 2000, there
was this landmark discovery
made by you, Ignacio Provencio,
David Berson, and others,
that these cells exists
that can communicate
day and night information to the brain.
- Yeah.
- In this very small
subset of cells.
Since then, I've heard, but
maybe you can confirm or refute
that this system that connects the eyes
to the rest of the brain
is actually the most
ancient form of vision.
That this is probably the
form of vision that some early
version of human beings had
before they had pattern vision,
before they could see colors and shapes
and motion and all that.
And that the same cells
that perform this role
are actually similar to insect eyes.
I think I heard David Berson
say once that we actually
have a little bit of
the fly eye in our eye.
What's he talking about?
- Yeah.
So, it's really interesting actually,
because these same ipRCGs we
discovered they contribute
a little bit to image formation.
And now, work from Tiffany
Schmidt specifically have proven
that they do contribute to
image forming functions.
But they contribute to very limited
aspect of image formation.
So, it fits your hypothesis that these
are an ancient photoreceptors.
The other thing that
adds to that hypothesis
is that they are expressed
in cells that don't have
any modification that make
them look like photoreceptors.
So, the photoreceptors
that I told you about
that are important for
vision, image formation,
they have very specialized
structures that allow them
to pack these structures
with photopigments;
these are the photo-detecting proteins,
so they could detect a
high sensitivity of photons
that pass through them.
These new photoreceptors don't have
these specialized structures.
So they just really need a
lot of light at the time,
we thought they need a lot
of light to be activated.
So that's why we think they are ancient.
And that's why we think they
adjust to ancient functions
that are as important as regulating
your body circadian clock
to the solar environment,
to solar day or to the light-dark cycle.
- So, you mentioned ipRCGs,
intrinsically photosensitive.
So these are cells that
connect the eye of the brain
that behave like photoreceptors.
- Right.
- Essentially.
And then you mentioned melanopsin,
which is the actual pigment
that converts the light
into the electrical signal-
- Yeah.
- More or less.
And my understanding is that
melanopsin was identified first
in frog melanophores.
- Yes.
- So does that mean that
we have like little pieces
of frog skin in our eyes?
- So, honestly, David Berson
say you have a fly in your eye
because it sounds better.
The more accurate I think is that you have
a frog skin in your eye.
It's not as catchy, but really,
the name melanopsin is
from melanocyte opsin,
so it's melanopsin because it was found
in the frog melanocytes.
You know the frogs can change
their color depending on light
and melanopsin drives this response.
So when Ignacio Provencio first discovered
these opsins in frogs,
luckily he was smart enough
to see if they are expressed
in the frog eye.
They were expressed in the
frog eye and it what appears
to be retinal ganglion
cells, which I told you,
the one that connects
the eye to the brain.
He had the insight to go and see
if they are expressed in the monkey eye.
And he found that they are
also expressed in what appears
to be retinal ganglion cells,
and really that what
opened the field wide open.
Then David Berson did
the seminal experiment
where he went to the brain
where the central oscillator,
the oscillator that drives
circadian rhythm in the brain
called the suprachiasmatic nucleus,
that has been known for many
years to receive retinal input.
And he labeled the cells
that project there.
And then he found that even
if you destroy rods and cones,
you could get light
responses from these cells.
So you could imagine he
nearly fainted when he saw
that these cells can respond independent,
completely in the absence
of rod and cone input.
- Yeah, I'll never forget reading
those papers in 2000, 2001.
I was at the meeting in DC when Ignacio,
Iggy, we call him Iggy,
showed this image of this basically
what is frog melanophores
in the human eye.
- Yes.
- [Andrew] And everyone was like,
"oh my goodness, this is the thing."
- Yeah.
- And I want to get into how light
actually can control circadian rhythms.
In a moment.
- Absolutely.
- But I think it's worth
mentioning now that people
who are pattern vision blind,
so people who cannot see
and no conscious vision,
but have eyes, many of them
still have these cells;
these melanopsin intrinsically
photosensitive cells,
and can essentially match
or entrain, as we say,
onto the light-dark cycle.
- In fact, they possibly have no problems
in circadian photoentrainment,
they'll have a normal sleep-wake cycle.
- But they're totally blind?
- But they are totally image blind.
And what's really interesting is that,
and this story I heard
from Chuck Czeisler,
so I'll give him credit,
that some of these people
who are image blind,
usually they get dry eyes and
they give them a lot of pain.
And doctors used to think,
oh, since they are image blind
and they're getting dry eye,
why don't you just remove their eyes?
They're not using them anymore.
And the minute they
would remove their eyes,
they start having cyclical
sleep problems indicating
that now they are not entraining
to the light-dark cycle
and are having cyclical jet
lags when their clock shifts
through the light-dark cycle.
- That's really interesting.
And I hear from a number of blind people
in my various aspects of my job,
and a lot of them have issues with sleep.
I think, in part because they
don't realize that they too
need to see light at particular
times of day or night
in order to match their schedule.
- Absolutely.
- Well, I think
that's a perfect segue for
us to talk about how light
and viewing light can impact
our sleep-wake rhythms.
And then we'll move into some
of the other ways in which
light can impact other
forms of bodily function.
- Yeah, so I love the way you set it up
because one of the most
interesting and difficult aspect
of trying to educate
people about light effect
on subconscious vision is
that it's subconscious.
So we're all aware of
what we think is intensity
because we see the room,
but if you talk to people
who know how to take
photographs and stuff like that,
they know that the
intensities varies greatly.
But our system, because we
have to see the same way
in very bright conditions
and very dim conditions,
we're not very good at
estimating intensity consciously.
So when you try to tell
people about intensity,
you really struggle because
they think they know intensity,
but they really don't.
- You mean light intensity?
- Light intensity.
- Yeah.
- So the cones themselves
have an incredible ability to adapt
to different light conditions.
So you can see at all
different conditions.
Otherwise it'd be a disaster.
If you don't change the
setting on your camera
and you go from inside
the room to the outside,
it becomes completely white,
you don't see anything.
So if your cones don't
adapt to the environment,
then you're not going to
be able to see in this room
and on the beach, right?
But the problem is your ipRCGs,
the cells that we talked about,
they measure intensity pretty well.
They really know what intensity is.
They have a very good linear
measurement of intensity.
They don't adapt as well.
They don't adapt actually
that much, to be honest.
So that tells you that
subconsciously the system is used
to measuring light intensity
in a natural environment,
because when you are now
in the natural environment,
you don't have industrialized lighting,
then your system is functioning very well.
But now when we change these environments,
we could really mess up ourselves.
So you have to teach people
how to understand intensity.
And that's something that you
have to explain to people.
And I think I love to do it myself.
I do it in what is called
the lowest amount of light
required to allow you to see comfortably.
So you have to do this
as an fun experiment.
- Okay, so explain to me how this goes.
And maybe we could break up the day
into three or four parts.
So let's say assuming
that most people wake up
in the morning-
- Mm hm.
- As opposed to night
shift workers, et cetera,
we could talk about later.
- Right.
- But they wake up in the morning,
so let's divide the day into quarters.
What is the proper way
to interact with light
in the first part of the day?
- So, I honestly think the
easiest thing is waking up,
get as much light as you can.
- To your eyes?
- Yeah, it's really nice.
Your system is prime.
If you're entrained,
it's prime to get light,
the sun should be out.
Most animals in the wild,
they actually seem to track the sun.
The sun has a huge
influence on life on earth.
It's actually life on
earth is because of sun.
So, that's easy.
In the morning when you
wake up, you need light.
Just get the light.
- Okay, so what is
the behavioral practice
that you recommend?
Let's say somebody is in a condition where
there's a lot of cloud cover.
- Yeah.
- Is it important to get outside?
- So, I have to tell you,
the cloudiest day is going
to be much more brighter
than your room.
You could ask any photographer.
A cloudy day, unless it's
really dark, dark clouds,
usually cloudy days have
much more light outside
than inside the room,
even when you have good
lighting inside the room.
So I think in the outside is
usually even when it's cloudy,
you're going to get to enough
intensity to help you adjust
your cycle to the day-night cycle.
- So, how long do you...
These are general rules of thumb,
but how long do you
recommend people go outside?
- So, if you do it daily,
you possibly need very few.
If you do it daily,
because remember this thing
is going to happen on a daily matter.
So, let's say 15 minutes.
- So, the clock is tracking
it on a regular basis?
- Absolutely.
It's photon counting, it's tracking.
I would say 15 minutes.
If you don't do it daily,
you may want to increase it.
And we'll talk about when you
travel, what you could do,
but yeah, 15 minutes should be fine.
You do it more, it doesn't hurt.
- And through a window,
my understanding is that through a window,
it dramatically decreases
the amount of light energy
coming in.
- It depends on how thick
the windows are and how dark they are.
So, but it's also nice to go outside
and to feel the seasons.
- Sunglasses off?
- I don't use sunglasses.
- Yeah, but you have your
Jordanian photopigment.
- Yeah, yeah, that's right.
- You know, so, yeah.
Whereas my eyes are very sensitive, right?
- No, but I personally,
if I'm in the shade
or if it's not incredibly bright,
I try to, especially in the morning,
but I'm also an early person.
So we have to differentiate between early-
- What time do you wake up?
- I wake up at 4:30 in the morning.
- But the sun isn't out yet.
- It's not out yet, so it's-
- So, what do you do?
You turn on artificial lights?
- I usually don't turn on artificial light
because I know the sun is
going to come up eventually,
but that's why I don't like the change
in the timing that they do.
- Wait, but what do you do
between 4:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.?
- I mean, I look at my computer,
and my phone.
- Oh, I see.
- So possibly I get enough light,
but in reality, I mean as
long as you let your body
get the morning sunlight,
which I think is really,
to me and there is no evidence of this,
but to me, if you look
at all animals, plants,
this morning sunlight
seems to be very important.
And we don't have experiments to show it,
but I have a gut feeling that it
has a huge impact on humans.
- Well, Jamie Zeitzer's lab
at the Stanford Sleep Lab
has shown that these early
morning light flashes
can adjust the total amount of sleep-
- Absolutely.
- That one will get.
It makes it easier to get into sleep.
- Absolutely, absolutely.
And Ken Wright also did this
beautiful camping experiments
that showed that-
- Maybe you could describe
those 'cause those are
beautiful experiments.
- Oh, yeah, they are
He took these college
students that had a late onset
of sleep and late waking time,
and then he said, let's go
camping and just don't use
any artificial light and
you could go to sleep
as late or as early as you want,
and wake up as late or as early.
And he found a huge shift
in their sleep pattern
just by exposing them
to the light-dark cycle.
I mean, so-
- And it has lasted.
- And it lasted, yeah.
- Even after they came back.
- Exactly.
- Those two days of camping
reset the circadian clock?
- Seven days, but it lasted.
Yeah, it's pretty amazing.
Yeah, it's really incredible.
- Okay, so get bright light
of some sort early in the day,
ideally sunlight, even on a
cloudy day, it's going to be-
- Absolutely.
- Brighter than indoor light.
- So that's easy.
- Okay, so then-
- And the other thing that
I would like to mention
to people, if you think
it's very dim outside,
let's say it's very cloudy, stay longer.
So remember intensity
is only one component.
Duration is also
important because remember
that the circadian system is
not like the image system.
In the image system you
have to change every second
because you're looking
at different objects.
You have to change your perception.
But for the circadian system
it's trying to figure out
where am I in the day-night cycle?
So the more you give them the information,
the better you are.
So, if it's very bright,
you don't need a lot
because it's clearly going
to make you fire like crazy.
But if it's not bright, stay
longer, stay for one hour.
You know, have your coffee
outside or something like that.
It's just going to help.
- I think you said something
extremely important,
which is that this circadian
system is trying to figure out
when you are in time.
- Exactly.
- Not where you are in space.
- Sorry, I said, where you are in time.
- Yeah.
- I mean when you are.
- Oh no, no, I wasn't correcting you.
I just meant that I think
fundamentally that's
the incredible thing about this system.
- Absolutely.
- That you have this clock,
this 24 hour clock in your brain,
but it needs to be
synchronized to the outside.
So could we go a little deeper
into this circadian setting
behavior and come up with
some general rules of thumb?
So, let's say it's a very bright day.
- Mm hm, mm hm.
- Extremely bright.
No clouds, the sun's out.
You said 10 minutes, 15 minutes.
- And I'll tell you if you're sensitive,
you don't even have to go in the sun.
You could be in the shade.
There's going to be so many
photons out there in the shade.
It's going to be perfect.
You don't even have to see the sun.
You don't have to have the sun.
You know, it's great for vitamin D,
that's a different story.
You could do this for your
skin and protect your skin.
That's not my area of expertise,
but for that effect on
the circadian system,
as long as you're outside in
the shade and it's sunny day,
10 to 15 minutes should be ample amount.
- Okay and then let's say
it's kind of overcast.
You know, it's not particularly bright
or there's solid cloud cover,
but obviously the sun is out,
but it's not as bright.
How long do you think it
would take to set the clock?
- 10 to 15 should be sufficient.
Stay for half an hour.
Stay for 45 minutes.
If it's very darker out, stay for longer.
- Okay and if for some reason,
one finds themselves very far north,
and it's very, very dense a cloud cover.
How long and at what point
should somebody consider
using an artificial light
source to mimic the sunlight?
- Yeah, honestly, this
is where we don't have
a lot of information still,
because this is where
we're going to discuss
this maybe in more detail,
that if you put humans
in artificial conditions,
the circadian system is
very sensitive to light,
but in reality, in the real environment,
light also is affecting other
aspects that are independent
of the setting of the circadian pacemaker.
- Okay.
- And these which we call
the direct effect of light
on mood, for example.
So, that is very hard to figure out
what intensity you need to use.
And we haven't done enough experiments
'cause this system has been
discovered just recently.
But I would say if you use
bright light in the morning,
and I mean, it's hard
for me to give numbers.
It can get complicated.
But yeah, I mean, honestly,
if you're that far north
and you're in the winter
and you make sure you don't,
use these light boxes.
I would suggest that
personally, but that's it.
- I use, it's actually not
designed for circadian setting,
but I have a 930 lux
light pad that I bought
and I bought it, they're
very affordable compared
to the dawn simulating lights.
- Yeah, you don't need them.
- Which are quite expensive, frankly.
- Yeah.
- And I put it there.
And so, just basically, when
I wake up in the morning,
I use that until the sun comes out,
and then I make sure once
the sun is out, I go outside.
But I keep that thing on all day.
And I don't know if that's good or bad.
Is a good or bad?
- I, honestly, I don't think
being exposed to bright light
in the day is going to
ever be bad because really
if you're outside in the day...
Unless, you know, the worst
that's going to happen
if the temperature is very high,
your body's going to say don't
dehydrate and go to sleep.
So you could tell actually
sometimes when it's very hot,
the more you get exposed to bright light,
the sleepier you feel in the afternoon,
which is counter-intuitive.
- Mm hm.
And that's to protect us, you
think, against dehydration?
- I think if you think
about the human evolution
from near the equator in between noon
and a certain time in the afternoon,
it would have been very
hard for you to maintain
physiological homeostatic function,
being active at this very
high temperature time.
So I think napping was a way,
that's why I think it has a
major function which is still...
Napping was a way to somehow take you away
from that dangerous zone.
And maybe that's why people
in the north they say,
in the winter we can't
wake up in the morning
'cause they don't have this long light.
So, they sleep more at night.
But in the summer they say,
we feel like we can't go to sleep.
We have to put all these dark curtains.
So, I think, venturing that
much up north has been...
Came up with a problem
because evolution was used to
a certain light environment
that was completely
changed with a human.
With other animals, I think
that lived there longer,
they have come up with
very interesting adaptation
of actually measuring
even very small changes
in the light intensities that still occur.
And so, even if you're near the poles,
even though it's always light,
but there is a change
in the light intensity
across the day-night cycle.
So, your system, if it's linear,
and remember I told you that
ipRCGs are incredibly linear,
can still measure, oh, this is
lower light than higher light
if the organism has
the ability to do that.
- I see, yeah, it's interesting.
I've spent so much time learning from you
fortunately about these cells,
and yet I never really
appreciated until now
how on the one hand they are
tracking the amount of light
to understand when we are in time
relative to the 24 hour cycle,
but also that you keep mentioning this
linear measurement of intensity;
that they really are trying to figure out
when we are in time by measuring
the intensity of light.
And of course the sun is
the most intense source
of light available to us.
So, okay, so I think we've nailed down
that first part of the day.
- Exactly.
- Basically it's get 10 to 30 minutes
depending on how bright it is,
and try and do that as often
as possible to give the system
a regular source-
- Daily is the best.
This system is really about,
and you'll see that even for
the effect on depression,
it's about multiple days it is.
So you don't have to worry
if you missed it one day,
stay longer if you want.
But if you're in a hurry and
you want to do other stuff,
that's a great recommendation.
- Mm hm, so you might want to
compensate with some extra time
if you missed a day or two.
- Absolutely.
- And this is why I've
heard you say before,
it's entirely possible to
get severely jet lagged
without traveling.
- Absolutely.
- Simply by staying in,
being on your phone too much,
not getting the sunlight.
- Absolutely.
And you saw this during the pandemic.
A lot of people mentioned that their
sleep-wake cycles suffered a lot.
Because if you're not going
out and if you're staying
at home and you don't have big windows
and you're waking late, waking up late,
and then you're using very
bright light too late at night,
your body is going to shift.
And now, your day is going
to start instead of like
really when the sun comes up,
let's say at six o'clock in the morning,
so your day is going to start
at 11 o'clock in the morning.
That's what your body's going to think
is the beginning of the day.
So, then you're not
going to be able to sleep
at 10 o'clock at night,
because now that's really for your body,
it's completely different timing.
And you could see this
happen during the pandemic
at a very high scale.
People get delayed in their
sleep-wake cycle a lot.
- And there is this idea of chronotypes,
that we all each intrinsically
have a best rhythm
of either being a morning person.
- Absolutely.
- You called yourself
an early person, or a night owl,
or more of a kind of
standard to bed around 10:30,
up around 7:00 type thing.
And I think there are now good data,
correct me if I'm wrong,
from the National Institutes
of Mental Health and elsewhere
showing that the more we deviate
from that intrinsic rhythm,
the more mental health issues
and physical health
issues start to crop up.
- So, there is great data on this,
and there is a couple of
things that complicate this.
The first is the people
who usually are late,
they tell you that the
society doesn't accommodate.
- By late, what do you mean?
People that wake up late
and go to sleep late?
- Go to sleep late and wake up late.
They have an overwhelmingly higher level
of depression and failures.
I mean, clearly, I mean,
the reason the people say
sleep early, wake up early,
you're better because
human notice that people
who go to sleep early and wake up early,
they do better in life.
They notice that.
- They just perform better?
- They perform, but the question is,
is that intrinsic to the
system or is that society
because society start things
usually early or late?
That's a hard question to ask-
- We discriminate against late risers.
- In a way, we discriminate, right?
But the other explanation
is Ken Wright's experiment.
These late riser, if they were
truly chronotypically late,
why would they shift so easily
when you put them in the...
If you were really chronotypically late,
and there is a phase relation between
the light-dark environment
and your circadian clock,
then doing this camping
experiment should not have caused
much changes because it's not
that light is going to affect you
in a certain way, it's that
this is the relationship
that your body decided that I'm
a late sleeper, late waking.
So, I'm honestly, I'm
still unable to figure out
how much of this late
waking up is controlled
by the light environment
and how much is intrinsic.
I'm sure there are differences,
but are they as big as we
see in the environment?
Because you have people that
go off to sleep a 7:00 p.m.
and wake up at 1:00 a.m..
These are clearly advanced phase-
- So people that go to sleep at 7:00 p.m.
and wake up at 1:00 a.m.?
- Yeah.
- And feel good doing that?
- I'm not so sure they feel good,
but a lot of the time you talk to people,
they say they are high achievers,
but they suffer because
they go to 7:00 p.m.,
wake up advanced phase sleep syndrome.
They call it a syndrome,
but then you have people
who would not be able
to sleep till 5:00 a.m.,
and not be able to wake
up till 3:00 p.m., right?
And I'm not so sure that
the circadian system
is that variable in the human population.
I mean, clearly there are
maybe some genetic factors
that make a small percentage
of like everything
with the bell shape.
But I think most of the time,
the light environment may play a role.
And once, as we've talked about,
this as a long-term effect of light.
Once you get into a rhythm,
and I don't mean it as a pun,
in reality, once you get into a rhythm,
it's hard to break out of that
rhythm because if you start
sleeping late and waking up late,
you're not getting the morning sunlight.
- Right.
- And so,
you're just going to be late.
And if you're like me waking up early,
you're getting the morning sunlight.
You're getting what Zeitzer said...
I said his last name wrong.
The one in Stanford who did the-
- Oh, Jamie Zeitzer, yeah.
- Zeitzer, yeah.
- [Andrew] He actually worked for-
- Zeitzer.
So, Zeitzer and Czeisler.
- Yeah, it's confusing.
- Yeah, there are a lot of
zz's and i's in their names.
- Yeah.
- Both phenomenal scientists.
- What it seems to me
is the case is that the
only way to really know
if you're meant to be an
early bird as they call it,
an early person or a late person,
or somewhere in between is
to get morning sunlight,
and figure out whether or not
that makes you feel better.
- And to understand,
to be educated about how
to measure intensity.
"How to measure" I put in quotation
'cause you either get a measuring device,
but you cannot depend on your
eye to measure intensity.
- Okay, so how do we do that?
'Cause you keep coming back to this.
So, that tells me that it's important.
- It's very important.
- So, obviously,
so there are apps, free
apps like Light Meter,
where you can walk around
and hold the button down
and see how many lux
are in the environment.
- These are complicated
because you have to point them
to specific regions.
- Right.
So, how do people start to
develop an intuitive sense
of the measurement of intensity?
- Yeah, I think at one
point I posted on Instagram,
how I keep my nighttime at home.
And I found out that my
night vision is very strong.
So I found out that I,
especially in the winter,
I only need candle lights.
So I literally use these tea lights,
and I put like 15 or 20 of them-
- How romantic.
- And it's so nice.
I could see it clearly doesn't
affect my circadian system.
- You and your cats-
- And my wife.
- And your wife of course.
- It's just great, right?
But I don't expect people to have
the same night vision as me.
So, I mean, I tell
people, do the experiment.
So if you put three or
four lights in your room,
switch two, sit for 15 minutes.
- Switch two off?
- Switch two off.
Let's say you're using five.
And see, after 15 minutes,
you will not recognize you
switched these two off.
My gut feeling is that
most people would need
at least 10 times less light
than they use at night to see.
The problem people use it
because most of the time they didn't
see the morning sunlight.
They are actually hungry for
light without their knowledge.
So they come switch all these lights on,
but at the wrong time.
Because they woke up late.
- Okay, now I understand.
So, this morning light
viewing goes way beyond-
- Absolutely, absolutely.
- Setting your clock.
It's also a way to
determine how little light
you need later in the day.
- Exactly.
- And we're going to talk
about this in a moment,
but how little light
you get later in the day
is a very strong
determinant of things like
when you will wake up,
whether or not you wake up
feeling refreshed, et cetera.
Let's move-
- And that's why,
- Yeah?
- I'm going to break it
on your show, Andrew, that
I'm going to tell you,
I think there is
something else that people
do need to think about, which
is the tripartite model.
That this model incorporate
three components
we should talk about in
details that allows us humans
and all animals to incorporate
the circadian clock,
and its relation to light,
the homeostatic drive,
and the direct effect of the environment,
which includes stress,
light, all kinds of stuff.
They have to be incorporated together.
If you think, that's
what I think right now,
if you think of one alone, you
will always miss something.
And when you think of them as a whole,
things really become clear.
It's actually quite amazing.
- Okay, well, we will
definitely want to hear
about your tripartite
theory and go into detail
about those homeostatic mechanisms.
I want to make sure that for
people who are thinking now,
I'm sure about light
and how it impacts them.
So the morning light viewing behavior,
I like to think we've tacked down clearly.
- Absolutely.
- And thank you for that
because there's so much
information out there
and I've tried to relay that information.
Of course, you're my primary source
for all things circadian,
as well as Jamie and others,
of course, and Matt Walker.
But I think you've made
that very, very clear.
Now, let's say I've gotten
my morning sunlight.
Okay, great.
Maybe my bright artificial light,
and throughout the day you
said to get a lot of light.
So, I'm working at my desk.
Maybe I'll go out during
the day a few times,
but I'm working at my
computer, I'm doing things.
Is there anything about light viewing
in the middle of the day that
people should keep in mind?
Or can they just sort of freestyle it
depending on what they're doing?
Most people are not in a
dark room throughout the day-
- Yeah, so my gut feeling,
if you've got your morning sunlight,
you walk from your car
slowly or you walk to work,
you didn't wear sunglasses when the lights
were still dim in the morning,
that you could freestyle it.
That even if you don't get a lot of light,
there is a way to just...
In the day, you don't
have to just worry about
getting a lot of bright light,
but personally, I like to do that.
So I go out at lunch and have
my lunch outside as well.
This reminds the body that
here it is even brighter now.
But the evidence is
that you could literally
help your circadian clock by
giving lights at dawn and dusk.
But again, if you think
of the tripartite model,
this may be important
for the circadian clock,
but is it important for your mood?
So that's where I think you
need, or the homeostatic drive.
So that's where you
need to think about it.
So, for the clock, for
entraining your clock,
you literally can entrain it
only by the dawn sunlight.
You actually don't need dawn and dusk.
People usually forget that.
- Yeah and I appreciate
that you're distinguishing
between circadian effects
and other effects of lights.
- Yes.
- You're being very precise,
which is appreciated.
Until we hear about this tripartite model,
which we will cover, for
the sake of the discussion,
let's treat the light viewing behavior
as what are the benefits or
drawbacks of viewing light
for all biological purposes,
not just circadian settings?
So, in the morning, it's
clearly going to set the clock.
And then, during the day,
if I understand correctly,
the idea is to get as much
bright light as you can,
because you're feeding,
it sounds like a sort of
light hunger.
- Exactly.
- I see.
- I love this way to put it.
I think there is a weird light hunger
considering that we're not
photosynthetic organisms.
There is a weird light hungers in animals
that they need measure.
And I think that relates to the season
because the whole
reproduction cycle of animals
is going to depend on the availability
of food in the environment.
And if you don't know when
the season is going to happen,
they don't have calendars,
it's going to be very hard to survive.
So I think that's why we
have this light hunger.
That's a major hypothesis.
It's not been tested.
- Interesting.
So, then afternoon and
evening start to approach.
So, I've had this weird experience.
Maybe you can psychologically
or biologically
diagnosed me now, Samer.
So, where if I go into a
movie in the afternoon,
like a matinee.
- Uh huh.
- And I come out and it's dark,
I notice a significant drop in my mood
and my ability to go to sleep.
Whereas if I get some view
of the light in the evening,
it doesn't have to be the sunset,
although sunsets are nice,
but I get some light
pulse in the afternoon
that I have no trouble
whatsoever falling asleep.
- And this happens on a
single time to watch them?
- Yeah, more or less.
- Wow, that's interesting.
- And then you mentioned
the camping experiment
where when they went camping,
they're seeing the sunrise and the sunset.
- [Samer] Mm hm, mm hm.
- So what should people
do in the afternoon
slash evening time in terms of
their light viewing behavior?
- I mean, the best thing to do is to let
the natural light creep
into darkness, right?
That would be the best,
but clearly that would be inefficient.
You want to go home, you want to read,
you want to talk to your kids,
you want to talk to your family.
So, I think it's nice to extend the day.
I don't think that's wrong.
If you somehow can block that light
from affecting your circadian clock.
- So, should people use blue
blockers in the evening?
- I personally do not like any blockers
that take a single wavelength of light.
Because again, if you think
of a holistic approach,
yes, the blue blocker
is going to prevent you
from affecting your
circadian clock very much.
But then your vision is
going to be distorted
because we always see in full spectrum,
the sun has this
beautiful spectrum, right?
And then when you start
seeing without the blue,
things look yellow and it
can get really weird, right?
I mean, so I personally,
I've tried the blue blocker
and I couldn't even wear them.
I thought they were just
really horrendous to be honest.
- Well, along the lines of blue blockers,
I think a lot of people
mistakenly wear them all day long.
- Oh my God, that would be very bad.
- A lot of people do that.
- That would be very bad.
They think that blue light is bad.
I think that the-
- No, no, no.
- The concept of blue light being bad
led to a lot of product development.
And a lot of people are
just assuming that viewing
blue light is what was
giving them headaches.
When in fact it might've just been
looking at screens at
close distance all day.
- So, here's the problem, right?
I mean, the blue light
got the bad reputation
because people who gave a pure blue light
showed that it 'caused
a huge retinal damage.
But again, if you're using
blue light in its pure form,
it has a lot of energy because
it's shorter wavelength,
but we're talking about
full spectrum light.
There are ways now where you could change
the spectrum of the
light and keep it white
between day and night and
change the content of the color
without you noticing.
So you don't even have
to affect your vision.
- So how would you go about doing that?
- So, you just lower the
level of the blue light.
You don't have to eliminate it.
- So just dim the lights?
- Dim the blue, then increase the yellow,
but keep all the colors
in a certain white.
So, you know, you could have
different warmness of white.
And people know how to do this.
Physicist know how to do this.
People who work with
light know how to do this.
- Well, maybe somebody
in the wellness slash,
I don't like the word, but biohacking,
or optical community will do this.
I think it's really important,
I see so many people
wearing blue blockers.
- They have meetings now.
I don't know why they block-
- Well, I think they're just uninformed.
I think, frankly-
- Yeah and to be honest,
it's easy, right?
It's easier to explain
to somebody if ipRCGs
respond mostly to blue,
remove blue, you'll be fine.
- Right, right.
- Right?
But that's not as simple as
that because they also receive
rod and cone input.
So you want to actually...
And we could go into details,
that's boring for your listeners,
but it also affect the adaptation
properties of the whole retina.
So you don't want to
do something so drastic
that you take just one
color of the spectrum.
It just seems very counter
intuitive to me, to be honest.
- You've told me before as well,
that just because these
intrinsically photosensitive
circadian setting ganglion cells
respond best to blue light,
if the light is bright enough
because they also get input
from other components of the eye,
it doesn't matter if you block the blues.
- Yeah.
- If you're looking
at bright light at night,
you're going to disrupt
your circadian cycle.
- Absolutely and that's
why I didn't want to
go into the boring details,
but themselves, the
photoreceptors have a wide range
of responsiveness.
So they are more sensitive to blue light,
but that doesn't mean they
don't respond to green light
or to shorter than blue light.
They respond to very, very wide spectrum
with different sensitivity.
So unless you understand the
system just removing 480,
I don't think it's going to do-
- 480 nanometers, yeah.
So, your home is a cave at
night basically with some-
- It's a nice cave.
- It's nice cave.
- Yeah.
- With candles.
- That's right.
- Right and you and your cats-
- And I watch TV and dim it.
- And your lovely wife.
- Yeah.
- Who I know, who's also
a phenomenal scientist in her own right.
- Thank you, yeah, she is.
- She is.
But you do keep your home quite dim
to dark at night?
- Yeah.
In fact, I did go to meetings
with some of my friends
who work on this and they
really struggled with me.
They said we could have
broken our legs living
in the same light environment that you do.
So I am an extreme, but
I measured it for myself.
And I asked, Rejji, my
wife, if she's okay with it.
She also liked the dimness.
Both of us can see well in dim conditions.
And that helps us a lot,
but I think you have to
measure it for yourself.
You really have to...
It's a very simple experiment.
Just try to dim the
light as much as you can.
I call it the minimum amount of light
you require to see comfortably.
- And that's how you want your environment
ideally at night?
- At night.
This is what I think is the game changer.
If you reach to a level
where it's just barely,
you're literally on the
cusp of seeing uncomfortably
versus seeing very comfortably,
you are going to be very much better than
I don't like to make it completely dark.
I think complete darkness induce anxiety
in humans, to be honest.
So I don't like complete darkness.
- Kids don't like complete darkness.
They like a nightlight.
- Even animal,
even nocturnal animals don't
like complete darkness.
I mean, we have studies in
animals that are nocturnal,
that if you put them in complete
darkness for several weeks,
they have severe anxiety
and depression like effect.
So keep the light dim, use
red light that is very dim,
if you want to keep the room for sleeping.
Red light that is very
dim has very small effect
on the circadian clock.
And below 10 lux of red light,
literally doesn't affect sleep at all.
So there are ways to do it.
It's just we need to educate the public.
And I feel like you literally
need a whole lecture
to just explain to the
people how to deal with light
because it's not as
simple as people think.
- Well, that's what we're doing here.
- Yeah.
- We're stepping through it
piece by piece and the
reason we're doing that
is because it's not as simple as saying,
just block blue light or get
a lot of light during the day,
and minimal at night.
- I mean, just to put it
in perspective and tell that we only have
three different cones in our retina
that respond to three different colors.
We call them red cones for simplicity,
green cones and blue cones.
Yet we have only three of these,
but we could see massive
palette of colors.
So that tells you something.
If the system was just
simply about a single color
and us just removing 480
or just blue is sufficient,
then we should only see
in red, yellow, and blue.
We shouldn't see all these
different hues of color,
but because the system is not that,
we see all these different colors.
And that's why it's
important to remind people
that the white light is made
of many different colors.
It's actually like the rainbow.
That's why you see the rainbow,
it's made of many colors.
White light is never truly white.
It's made of lot of different colors.
- It's like the Pink Floyd album cover.
- Exactly.
- With the light coming
through the prism.
- Exactly, exactly.
- So, dim at night, maybe
dim red light ideally,
or candle light.
Find that minimum required light level.
- Test it, just make sure
when you lower the lights,
sit for at least 10 to 15
minutes, let your system adapt.
Because if you had a bright
light and you switch it off,
surely you're going to
suffer because your system
didn't adapt yet; it was
used to very bright light.
So you want to engage your rods,
which take a long time to dark adapt.
So that's why I tell you,
just wait a little bit.
Don't just switch it off and
now I don't see, put it on.
Put it off, sit down, wait for 10 minutes,
ideally 15 minutes and
then see how you see.
And then once you do that,
you will notice that actually,
yeah, I could see quite well
even with much less light.
- What do you do regarding screens?
- Yeah, that's the hardest thing.
Again, I mean, there
are beautiful programs
that change the whole intensity
and color of the screen.
These could help dim your screen at night
to the lowest part.
I mean, yes, you won't see it
when you wake up in the morning,
but then you can increase that intensity.
So, try to decrease.
I mean, just what we were talking about.
Think of light intensity,
duration, color, and time of day.
You really have to keep these
four things together, right?
- We've roomed together
at a couple meetings
from time to time, no longer,
because one of us not to be
named has a severe snoring issue
that made the other one pseudo-homicidal.
[Samer laughing]
You can guess who that was.
But I've seen you check your phone
after dark once or twice.
- Mm hm.
- And you did it by sort
of pointing your phone
away from you, right?
- Exactly, yep, absolutely.
- And actually I'm sort of half joking,
and you dim it quite a bit.
- Yeah, dim it quite a lot.
- I'm sort of half joking,
but it actually makes
sense that if you shine
a flashlight in your eye,
it's much brighter than
if you shine a flashlight-
- Light only go in direct line,
so if you'd just look on the side,
most of the light is going to go this way,
and you're only seeing this way.
- Okay, so, and as
silly as that might seem
to people listening, I mean what it means
is that getting bright
light in your eyes at night
is something that you
really want to avoid.
But there is the reality that-
- And even when I check
sometimes if I have something,
and I check it so fast
and switch it off so fast.
So I'm also aware of duration-
- Not my messages.
- I'm also aware of the duration, right?
So duration, intensity,
color, and time of day.
Ideally I should not
check iPhones an iPads.
I don't use iPad at
night because it's hard
to lower it enough 'cause it's a huge.
But even my iPhone, I try
not to use it at night.
And like once it becomes 8:30 or 9:00,
I don't look at it at all.
- Unless it's World Cup
or Euro Cup, in which case
Samer's on 24 hours, everybody.
- Right, that's only every four years.
- He's a big soccer fan.
All right, this has been
incredibly, no pun, illuminating.
Let's talk about the
relationship between light
and some of these other non-circadian
or pseudo-circadian effects.
And we will try and link those.
But you had a what I
consider absolutely landmark
beautiful paper published
in "Nature" a few years ago,
showing that if you disrupt
the exposure to light
or the timing of the exposure to light
that there are dramatic
effects on the stress system
and on the learning and memory system.
Maybe we could talk about each of those
separately or together.
What are the effects on stress
and the effects on learning
when light viewing behavior
and sleep-wake cycles are disrupted?
- Yeah, so just to remind
you, you know that,
but to remind your
listeners that I was trained
as a circadian biologist.
So I really was indoctrinated
into thinking that light
has to affect the clock,
which then caused all
these different effects.
So, that's what I believe.
That's my dogma.
That's what have made me really happy.
And then Tara LeGates and
Cara Altimus joined the lab
and we started discussing a lot of data.
And we said, what if there
is a direct effect of light
that we're missing, independent
of the circadian clock?
So this is not an easy
question to us to answer,
because as we've been talking all along,
light affects the circadian clock.
So how could you give light
at different times of the day
and not mess up the circadian clock?
Luckily, we came up with such a way,
and that's why it was important
to do these experiments
the way we did them.
And we proved that this light-dark cycle
does not disrupt the clock,
there is still a circadian rhythm,
and does not cause sleep deprivation.
And yet, surprisingly, if you give light
at the wrong time of the day,
even without disrupting
the circadian clock
or without causing sleep deprivation,
as you mentioned you get
the huge mood changes
in the organisms and you
get learning deficit.
So, this really, and at
the time people have really
hit us hard.
I mean, it was really
hard to publish this work
and you could, yeah.
- Well, it came out in "Nature."
- Yeah.
- So in the end you prevailed,
but I want to make sure that I understand.
So, you're saying that yes,
there are effects of light
on the circadian rhythm.
- Absolutely.
- Sleep meaning
sleep and wakefulness.
- Yes.
- And their timing.
However, there are direct
effects of light on mood
that can be dissociated from the effects
on sleep and waking.
- Absolutely.
- So if I interpret that correctly,
that could mean that when we
view light and how much light,
could make us feel happier or
less happy or even depressed,
stressed, learning, et cetera.
- Bingo.
- Even if we're sleeping
and waking up at the appropriate time?
- Bingo.
I mean, eventually because we're talking
about the whole system,
eventually when you start
having the other problems,
you also develop sleep problems,
but you're absolutely right.
And in fact, now, research
from Diego Fernandez
in the lab have found that
now we know that they actually
require different brain regions.
So we don't only have a theory,
we don't only have a light environment
that showed they can be dissociated,
we know that they use completely
different brain regions.
So, the SCN that I told you about earlier,
the place where the central pacemaker is,
the one that receives
direct input from the retina
through the ipRCGs to
adjust your circadian clock
is not the area that
receives the light input
for mood regulation.
It's a completely different brain region.
- What's the brain region called?
- So the brain region,
we called it the perihabenular nucleus.
I'm not so sure how good or bad the name,
but it doesn't matter, it's that PHb.
And what's really amazing,
this region also receives direct input
from the ipRCGs, but projects
to areas in the brain
that are known to regulate mood,
including the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex,
which has been studied for many years
to be impacted in the human depression.
So just by this amazing serendipity
to find that a region that is
so deep in the advanced brain,
like the prefrontal cortex
is your executive brain,
one of the most elaborated in humans,
to see that they receive inputs from
these ancient photoreceptor
was stunning to us,
and told us how much we didn't understand
the importance of light
on a human behavior.
- So, how does that finding
inform daily protocols
for you or for other people?
I realize you can't leap
always from one paper-
- Absolutely, yes.
- To daily protocol.
But if light indeed does
control prefrontal cortex,
executive function,
learning, stress and mood,
and let's say I'm waking up
each morning and I'm sleeping.
What should I do different?
- That's why we came up
with the tripartite model
because yes, we could think
about just adjusting the clock
with lights in and being
dark throughout the day.
But that may not be important
for your whole physiological function.
So, now, if we include these
other effects of light,
that's why I prefer to still
get a lot of light in the day.
I don't want to be in
very dim light condition
throughout the day.
- I see.
- So, even though it
doesn't affect your clock,
as you beautifully said, Andrew,
it may affect your mood
and learning and memory.
It may affect your alertness level,
which is going to allow
you to learn better.
It may affect your homeostatic drive,
maybe your homeostatic
factor would go higher
so you could sleep earlier.
So it's important to think
of light as stimulating
all these brain regions,
which means it's producing more activity,
which in reality this is how people think
of the homeostatic drive,
that the more active you are,
the more the homeostatic
drive is built up,
the better you sleep.
So that's why we came up
with the tripartite model
because as a circadian biologist,
I only thought of light
through the circadian clock
affecting behavior.
As a sleep biologist, they
only thought of the homeostatic
drive affecting sleep, affecting behavior.
And for people who study light
for vision and other form,
they thought only of
the environmental input.
But now if you put them all together,
you get with this tripartite model
where it's really mind boggling.
And it makes so much sense.
The organism doesn't want to
depend on a single component,
but if you could incorporate
these three together,
you could have a beautiful
system that is well adapted.
So let me tell you the
sleep-wake cycle, right?
So we know that there
is a homeostatic drive
to affect sleep.
You've had beautiful talks about that.
- Which is basically
the longer you're awake,
the more you want to be asleep.
- So, that's your homeostatic drive.
We've talked about the
circadian influence of sleep
and the fact that light-dark cycle
affect the circadian system,
which eventually affects sleep.
So these two components
are well understood.
Now the third factor is your direct light
or environmental input.
How much stress, how much
light you get from there
also can highly impact sleep.
So even if you have a good
circadian and homeostatic drive,
if you're getting light at
the wrong time of the day,
or if you're being stressed
and thinking a lot,
then your sleep is going to suffer.
So you have to think of the three together
to have a beautiful sleep-wake cycle.
- I see.
- And that's why
we came up with the tripartite model.
The same thing happens with feeding.
I could beautifully put it to people.
Your hunger, your energy level is measured
by the arcuate nucleus.
Your daily intake of food is again,
dependent on the SCN and light-dark input.
We found that if food is not available,
there is yet a third input that
is not depending on the SCN,
not depend on the arcuate,
depending on a completely
different brain regions.
So the animal can actually start looking
or the human can start looking
for food when it's scarce,
even at time when they are
not supposed to be active.
So, that's how the organism think,
they have to evaluate multiple
inputs for them to decide
what is the best physiological outcome
at that moment, at that season?
- I see.
So, I want to get into
arcuate and feeding,
but just to make sure
we can keep our hands
around this tripartite model.
So, if I understand correctly,
we've got the circadian influence,
then you've also got the drive to sleep.
- Right.
- Actually, one of the ways
that I think that can be best
understood is if somebody
ever pulls an all-nighter,
they get tired around
11:00 or 12:00 or so,
and then very tired
around 3:00, 4:00 a.m.,
but then even if you stay
up sometime right around
7:00 or 8:00 a.m., your
normal wake up time,
you start to feel alert again.
- Exactly.
- And that's because
the sleep drive is extremely strong,
but there's a circadian rhythm that drives
wakefulness in the morning.
- Exactly.
- Okay, so that's two are the components.
- [Samer] Right.
- Before we get into
the feeding component,
I want to talk about these direct effects
of light on mood.
- Mm hm.
- Okay, Diego Fernandez's data.
And this perihabenular thing.
- Sure.
- So, let's just for the
moment set aside the tri part
of the tripartite model and just focus on
what are the direct
effects of light on mood?
And the way that I interpret
what you've said so far
is that the protocol
that emerges from this
if one trying to optimize their mood is,
yes, see light, view light I
should say, early in the day,
in order to set your circadian clock.
Maybe also in the evening as well.
And of course, avoid light at night,
get it as dim as possible.
However, you said, it's
also a good idea to get
as much bright light during
the day as you safely can,
in order to improve
your mood independently
of regulating your sleep-wake cycle.
- And that's the hypothesis.
Here's the problem where
it's not going to be
as satisfying as the
circadian is that as you know,
this brain region has been
discovered very recently.
- Habenula?
- The perihabenular region.
- Well, we've known about it a long time,
but nobody knew what it did.
- So, we knew about the habenula,
but that's why the name is confusing.
It's actually not the habenula itself.
It's the perihabenular.
- Oh, near the habenula.
- It's near the habenula.
- Why don't you just call
it the Samer Hattar nucleus?
- I should have.
I don't know why I haven't done that.
- Maybe 'cause if you
do that, it's not okay.
Okay, so for here ever after
the perihabenular nucleus,
we should probably call it the Hattar-
- The Hattar-Fernandez.
- How about
Hattar-Fernandez-Berson nucleus.
- Yeah, that should-
- Okay, this is like nerdy
science attribution stuff,
but I'm just going to call it
the Hattar nucleus.
Wikipedia, line it up.
Okay, so this structure is taking light,
and independent of sleep
rhythms and circadian rhythms,
it's driving changes in mood.
- Something.
- How does it do that?
Is this through the dopamine system?
The serotonin system?
- We still recently,
we haven't identified
this region very well.
We don't know what light does to it.
We don't know how it interacts.
So this is an area that
is ripe for discoveries
and we're working on this right now.
But that's why I said,
it's not satisfying.
This is like the function of sleep.
Why do we sleep?
We know sleep is very important to us,
but we still don't have
a satisfying function
of why do we sleep, right?
- I see but the why questions-
- We have hypothesis.
- The why questions, I
think it's our good friend
and colleague at University of Washington,
Russ Van Gelder, who always says,
when somebody asks why, that
the best answer is just to say,
I wasn't consulted at the design phase.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Right, none of us
really know why.
- No, but the point is
maybe I shouldn't have said why,
what is the function of sleep?
It's still very hard to know.
What is the reason organisms
have to go offline for so long?
You know, people assume it's for repair,
assume it's for learning and memory,
assume all kind of stuff,
but there is really no
clear function for sleeping.
There is no clear function for sleeping.
I mean, if you talk to
people, there are hypotheses.
- I mean, all we know is
that if you don't sleep-
- Exactly.
- Or your sleep
is very fractured, you get messed up.
- And you could die even, right?
I mean, it's really
bad if you don't sleep,
but we don't know what is the function?
What is that sleep have done to organisms
that couldn't have done with rest?
What if you just could
rest without sleeping?
Just sit down and rest.
- Well, my lab is trying to
figure out whether or not
these non-sleep deep rest protocols
can compensate for sleep.
- That would be interesting.
- I mean, obviously sleep
is better, but many people are not getting
the sleep that they need.
- Right.
- But, okay.
So, and if people are
sensing that Samer and I
are about to start talking
over each other and arguing,
that's always the goal
when we talk, right?
- That's right.
- Unlike other scientists I interact with,
when Samer and I get together,
it's considered a successful conversation
if we get into a big fight,
and then go for a big meal-
- That's right.
- Where I pick the restaurant.
[Samer chuckling]
Okay, so let's talk about
food and eating and appetite.
You had yet another, yes, I
greatly admire your success
in this way, yet another
incredible discovery
showing that there are
direct effects of light
on appetite and feeding behavior.
Okay, maybe you could just summarize
those results for people.
- Honestly, that paper is
the one that allowed us
to come with the tripartite model,
because we were thinking
completely wrong about it.
We wanted, this experiment,
it'd be fun for your audience
to hear why we started this experiment.
Remember that when we
discovered the ipRCGs,
we figured if they are the only relay
to entrain the circadian clock,
then you could kill them
and have an animal opposite
to the one that we spoke or
a human opposite to the one
that we spoke about earlier.
Where instead of having no pattern vision
and have circadian photoentrainment,
we could produce an animal
that have pattern vision,
but no circadian photoentrainment.
- Hm, so circadian blind.
- Circadian blind, but pattern sighted.
And we succeeded in that.
The problem when you have these animals,
which I've told you many times already
is that they don't adjust
to the day-night cycle.
So doing experiments on them
become very complicated.
- What is their behavior like
if you don't have these cells?
Are they awake and then
asleep, awake and then asleep?
- They just drift like the
humans we've talked about.
- They think they're in Las Vegas
with no clocks or watch-
- They drift, exactly.
- They stay up later every
night and go to sleep-
- They can either, depend on their clock.
If their clock is shorter,
they come in earlier.
If their clock is longer,
they come in later.
- So they're really messed up?
- They really don't adjust to it.
If they were in the wild,
they'll be eliminated in a second, right?
There is no way they'll survive.
So, me and Diego started
talking and we're like,
what if we use non-light
in training agent?
And what is the strongest
non-light in training agent?
Food.
So we thought that the
light defective animals
will have more sensitivity
to food entrainment
because as you know more than me,
this is an area that you've
worked really well on,
for vision, if you're image blind,
your hearing and somatosensory
get improved, right?
The lack of vision improves
your hearing and sensation.
But we found actually
that if you don't have
the light to system, actually
the food ability to entrain
the animal goes completely to the ground.
Completely opposite to what we predicted.
- So light viewing and feeding
behavior are interacting
in ways that support one another.
- And that's why we came
with the tripartite model.
We figured it's different than
sensation of the environment.
When you sense with vision,
vision and hearing interact,
but your vision is a real full modality.
You want to see.
That's what vision wants to do.
You want to hear.
That's what hearing wants to do.
You want to sense.
That's what sensing want to do.
But for the circadian system, light, food,
all these entraining agent,
they somehow have to interact
to keep a coherent system.
You don't just assume if you remove light,
this one is going to be stronger.
No, they need to know each others.
The light informs when the
animal is going to eat.
- Well, what I like about
this so much is that
in the world outside of science,
in which I don't really exist
in, but that I see a lot of,
this kind of wellness and stuff with
all this mind-body integration stuff.
It's interesting because
people view the body
more as a system, right?
A system of organs that interact,
as opposed to the way
that standard science
and medical profession is like,
you work on the liver or
you're ear, nose and throat,
or heart and lung, or brain or-
- Wow, that's a great
way of thinking about it.
- But the biology is integrated.
- Yeah.
- And so, for somebody who's
interested in effecting
their eating behavior,
something that you are familiar with,
and that we will talk more about
your experiences of in a moment,
how should they use
light in order to adjust
their eating behavior?
- Right.
So, now that I've told you
about all these interaction
between the different inputs
to the circadian clock,
just you think about it as an engineer,
what would be the best thing?
The best thing is to know
when your food times happen
in the day, when should you get light,
and when is your circadian
clock in your system, right?
So, if you eat at very
specific times of the day,
that's another signal that is
telling your body, your clock,
you're in a certain time of the day.
So if you're having lunch at
the correct time every day,
and you're getting bright light,
now you have two systems that
are informing your clock,
your clock is going to be better.
- So regular mealtimes?
- Regular mealtimes that
fit your circadian clock.
So, and in fact, if you do
that, when I started doing this,
and it helped me lose weight,
is that I'm exposing
myself to the right amount
of light-dark cycle, I'm
eating at regular time.
It is amazing.
You would be not hungry,
let's say you eat at noon,
you will not feel any hunger at 11:45.
And then all of a sudden the hunger jumps.
This is clearly not an energy issue
because it could not be that drastic.
- No, the desire to eat is
mainly driven by these cues,
these hormone cues that are
very exquisitely timed to-
- Exactly.
- Sleep-wake cycle,
but also to light.
- Exactly.
And you know, in the wild,
you could imagine why energy level
through the arcuate nucleus-
- You should explain to
people what the arcuate is
'cause I don't think we've
done that adequately.
The arcuate nucleus is an
area of the hypothalamus
that drives hunger and feeding behavior.
And what we're talking
about is the fact that
it's taking cues from
your viewing of light,
believe it or not, is
impacting your level of hunger.
And this is a non-trivial way
in which your timing of hunger
and amount of hunger is regulated by when
and how much light you view.
So, let me ask you a couple of practical-
- But can I just, this is
really, before you asked me-
- Sure.
- Sorry, Andrew.
We said we are going to fight, but to me,
the interesting thing to think about it,
in the wild when you didn't
have the availability
of food that we have,
the arcuate plays a huge
important role because
if you weren't successful
in getting food, then the
arcuate is going to tell you,
look, you have to take
risks and go get food
because your energy level is very low.
And that's great, there's tons
of great research about that.
But I think what's missing
is the fact in humans,
we're not getting to a situation...
Most of us, we're not
getting to a situation
where we have low energy levels.
Most of the time actually
we eat not because
we are really have low energy,
but because we want to eat.
So I think that's why
I feel that the timing
is very important for us because we always
have enough energy level for us to eat.
- Well, I mean, I enjoy
eating so much that I'll eat
just for the sensation of chewing.
- True, true.
- I mean,
I enjoy the taste too.
- True, absolutely.
- And I enjoy the social aspects
when those are a part of it.
- Absolutely.
- But I literally enjoyed
the physical act of chewing.
- [Samer] Absolutely, absolutely.
Uh huh.
- Which explains a lot.
Okay, so how regular are
you or do you recommend
people be about mealtimes?
Because what I'm hearing is
that light viewing behavior
is pretty straightforward.
Get a lot of light in the
morning and throughout the day,
minimize it in the evening and
at night, generally speaking,
for sake of mood and circadian rhythm.
But for sake of regulating
timing and quality
I should also say of food intake,
because people clearly make
better choices about food intake
when they are anticipating a meal
and they aren't constantly hungry.
And so, the ability to regulate
hunger for particular phases
of the circadian cycle is
quite valuable for all people.
Not just people trying to
lose weight, but all people.
Are we talking about down to the minute?
- Absolutely not.
- All right, so 12:00
noon is my normal lunch,
let's say plus or minus?
- Half an hour.
- Okay.
So eat around between 11:30 and 12:30.
- If that's the time.
And it depends if you
also do multiple meals.
Remember three meals, that's
a decision that somebody
came up with, I don't know why.
- And nowadays, fewer people
are doing that I think.
- Yeah.
- Given our friend,
Satchin Panda's work.
- Right.
I mean, so you could have two meals,
you could have very multiple
meals that are distributed
across your active time.
I agree with Satchin Panda's
work that try to avoid eating
when your system is
supposed to be relaxing,
when you're supposed to
be at non-active times.
So, limit your eating to the
active time of your cycle.
And that seemed to be, and Joe Takashi
is doing some beautiful stuff on this,
that seems to be incredibly important
for aspect of the circadian.
- And for health.
- Yeah, we're referring
to Satchin Panda's work,
he wrote a beautiful book
called "The Circadian Code."
Maybe Samer, with some luck
you'll write a book as well.
Meaning the world will be
lucky to have that book,
but Satchin's data really
strongly point to the fact
that liver health, brain
health, metabolic factors,
and endocrine factors of
various systems and organs
all seem to benefit from having
a period of each 24 hour day
in which we are not eating anything
and then eating at very regular mealtimes.
- [Samer] Absolutely.
- Let's talk about eating and mealtimes
and let's move a little bit away
from the science for the moment,
although we will return to it,
and talk a little bit
more about your experience
with eating and mealtimes.
So, you're looking in good shape lately.
- Thank you.
- I know you've been
putting work into it.
- Yeah.
- We talk a lot and you've been exercising
and you've been eating
well, meaning quality food.
You just came back from Jordan
where I'm assuming the food is amazing.
- Yes, the food is amazing and honestly,
usually I gain a lot of weight in Jordan,
but this time I didn't gain any weight,
which was really nice, so.
- Yeah, when I met you, you
were probably about 100 pounds
heavier than you are now.
- Yeah, 275 pounds.
I'm 219 now.
It's crazy, yeah.
- You had a lot of vigor then,
and you have a lot of vigor now,
but I know that you undertook
a very specific protocol
in order to lose the weight,
based on your understanding
of the circadian system-
- Yes!
- And of light,
and appetite and mood.
Maybe you could just tell
us a little bit about
what that schedule looks like.
And we realize that this
is not a prescriptive
for everybody, but you
found what worked for you.
- Yeah.
- To maybe just describe
those changes.
- I mean, honestly,
I followed my circadian cycle, right?
Of what we've talked about, right?
So I dimmed the light at night,
I slept at regular hours,
I ate my major food in breakfast and lunch
when I'm really active
and I'm really hungry.
And at night when I avoid dinner,
because my circadian system
really shuts off at 3:00.
I'm an early person.
Like you could give me anything
I would eat before 3:00,
after 3:00, nothing appeals to me anymore.
My system is shut off.
- Well, what time are you going to sleep?
And what time are you waking up?
- Oh, so in my case, I
should have put this up.
I mean, I go to sleep
literally at 9:00 p.m..
I mean, I literally five
minutes after 9:00 p.m.,
I'm completely out.
And I wake up between 4:30 and 5:00 a.m..
So if I extend it, I go to 6:00 a.m.,
but very rarely.
It depends on how tired I was.
- And that, as I recall, was
an important set of changes
for you to be able to-
- Absolutely.
- Regulate your food intake.
- Absolutely because then I'm
having very big breakfast,
and again for different
people it's different,
I have a big breakfast
at 7:00 a.m. maximum.
So I have a big breakfast,
coffee, and all this stuff.
Then I have some simple
snack around 10:00.
Then I have regularly lunch at noon,
or between noon to 1:00.
Then I have another snack at 3:00.
And the hardest time to regulate the food
is between 12:00 and 3:00.
This is when I really
feel hungry all the time.
- This is your equivalent of kind of
late evening for most people.
- Yes!
- So for me,
it would probably be
between 7:00 and 10:00 p.m..
- Exactly, exactly.
- Got it.
- And then at night I'm
completely not hungry,
but usually as you said,
the beauty or the enjoyment of food,
like when my wife cooks some
really beautiful Indian food,
I eat, but I'm not hungry.
And I notice if I eat with
that, I usually gain weight.
But if I regulate that at
night, I also lose weight.
So there is a combination of
all these things that help you
adjust the input of
food, the input of light,
the input of the clock,
and the drive to hunger.
- Yeah, I appreciate you sharing that.
And I want to emphasize that some people
are not hungry early in the day.
They might be late shifted people.
- Exactly.
- In which case,
eating later in the day
will work well for them.
- It will work well as
long as they don't eat
early in the morning.
That's just, you have to
work with your schedule,
with your active schedule.
- Yeah, you and I have been talking
about this offline for years.
I'm glad we're finally having
this discussion publicly now.
What we're talking about really is finding
your ideal sleep schedule.
- Exactly, exactly.
- And finding your ideal
eating schedule.
- Exactly.
- And understanding how
those two things interact.
- And do you know the
nice thing, as you said,
finding them out is going to help you
to understand how they interact
because we know from the tripartite model
that they are all interconnected.
And for each person they're going to be
interconnected differently.
So, for each person you would...
You know, for me, if I exercise at night,
I'm going to mess up my whole system.
- When do you exercise?
- Morning.
Morning works great for me.
I mean, it's amazing.
Morning exercise for me works great.
If I tried one time,
because it was easier for me
to exercise at night before I leave,
when the traffic is there from the night.
And I think that messed me up
because I couldn't sleep well
and I couldn't wake up well.
And that led to more changes in my food.
I gained weight again
actually, believe it or not,
even though I was exercising.
So I think this really makes
me think that you have to think
of the tripartite model to
see what is the best times
and what is the best interrelation between
the different component,
as you beautifully said,
between your mealtimes,
your light exposure,
and your sleep that works for you.
- Well, thanks for that.
Usually Samer's insulting me.
Today, he's complimenting me.
I'm going to compliment
him right back by saying,
this is the first time that
I've ever really understood
how yes, light can control sleep.
Yes, it control mood.
Yes, it can impact feeding,
but that it's really about
doing the self exploration
to align those in the way that works best.
And what I'm hearing,
tell me if I'm wrong,
but what I'm hearing is
that once you understand
what gives you the best sleep-wake cycle,
then you should exercise
during the period of time
in which you feel most alert.
And if it works for your schedule,
ideally you would also eat
during the time in which
you feel most alert and then stop eating
and stop light viewing behavior
as you head towards sleep.
- Right.
So, the only thing I would say
that complicates all of this,
and that's what makes me
sad, is your light exposure.
- Mine personally?
- Sorry.
- No, I'm just kidding.
- The people's light exposure, right?
This is what complicates it
because you're not going to be able
to figure all this out if
you're shifting yourself
out of your comfort zone.
- By viewing-
- By viewing light
at the wrong time of the day.
So, let's say if you were under
an ideal natural conditions,
you're a person who would
sleep later than me.
Let's say we'll sleep at midnight
and wake up at 8:00 a.m..
Let's say you don't
eat anything till noon,
and as you said, you
eat late in the evening.
Then this would be perfect for you,
but now see what happens
if now you include
the light component.
Now, if you push your sleep
from midnight to 4:00 a.m.,
now you're waking up in the
morning and you're actually
really not the morning...
You're working, I'm sorry, at
noon instead of eight o'clock,
and the time where you're
not supposed to be hungry,
now you're going to start
eating directly at noon
or something like that, or even delay it.
And now you're shifting your whole cycle.
And you don't know if this
interaction between your sleep,
feeding and the light-dark environment
are still going to be maintained or not.
And that's the problem that people have.
- So, as I'm hearing this what
I'm realizing is most of us,
probably me included, are
messing up at least one, two,
or three of these components.
- Exactly, exactly.
- But that the probe, the way
to figure out what's right
for oneself is to start
manipulating light exposure.
- Right and I'm going to be honest,
I'm biased 'cause I believe that light
is the strongest time giver.
And a lot of people disagree.
Some people think feeding is.
- I always thought that light
was the primary zeitgeber,
the primary light-
- Yeah, but a lot of people
think it's food.
A lot of people even sometimes
mentioned social interaction.
- Have they read the literature?
- I agree with you.
I totally agree with you.
- I mean, my understanding is that light
is the most powerful driver-
- Absolutely.
- Of the things we're talking about.
- That's why I think we
need to regulate this first
and everything else fits.
And you know, the nice thing
is that your sleep-wake cycle
and exercise tell you really bluntly
if you're doing it right or not.
- Tell me more about that.
- I'll tell you more.
When I shifted my exercise, honestly,
things fell apart like never before.
- When you moved from
exercising early in the day
to late in the day?
- In the morn, yeah.
It completely fell apart for me.
I didn't enjoy exercise at night.
My pain tolerance for
exercise wasn't as good.
I'm talking with N equals
one and I'm aware of this.
I've never tested this
empirically, but at least to me,
it really messed up everything.
I started having problem
because my body temperature
would go up and that will affect my sleep.
I possibly was running in
the gym with a lot of lights.
So maybe the light was
a component, but for me,
exercising in the morning,
it's so much better for me.
But a lot of people can't even
think of exercising in the morning.
So it depends on when you feel comfortable
in your sleep-wake
cycle and your exercise.
I think that tells you if your system
is in synchrony with one another.
- That's really interesting.
We're good friends, our
friend, Pat Dossett,
that we both know.
- Mm hm, oh, absolutely.
- He did nine years in the Seal Teams.
And he's one of these people he says,
he's happy to go for a
run or a swim anytime
between 4:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m..
And he'll train in the afternoon too
'cause he's a Seal Team guy and
they'll do whatever anytime,
that's part of the phenotype,
but he feels best doing that, right?
I like to exercise mid-morning.
- Interesting.
- And I'm happy to skip eating
until 12 or 1:00.
- Great.
- And I like to go to
sleep around 11:30, 12:00,
'cause I'm a normal human
being rather than you
who goes to bed at 9:00 p.m.
- What about Pat actually?
I've never asked him what time.
- Pat?
So, Pat's ideal to sleep
time, I've asked him this,
would be around 8:30 or 9:00 except now-
- Oh, so I'm like Pat!
- Yes, but he has two
young children, two
years old and a newborn.
And so, the cycle is disrupted, right?
- Yeah, but that's known, right?
I mean the effect of childbearing.
- Right.
- And I think that we could
talk about this, that's more complicated-
- Right.
- But that's pretty much.
- Yeah, I mean, I think we
need to come up with a new name
for chronotype because-
- I agree, I agree.
- Chronotype implies that it's
just about sleep and wake;
being an early bird or a night owl.
And what we're also talking
about is how exercise
and eating match onto those.
- The the phase relation between them.
- Right.
- And the phases between
different components, as you said.
- 'Cause they interact.
- Because they interact.
- Right.
- And they don't have
to be in the same phase.
Like let's say my light and food
could be very close to each other.
Your light and food could
be different, right?
The phases don't have to
be, they can be plastic.
So you have to find this for yourself.
You maybe you're a person
who eats late at night,
exercises late at night,
or you may be a person who
exercise early, eat later.
So, as long as the phase is good,
that's what you have to find out.
- Okay and if I understand correctly,
when you're talking
about phase relationship,
it means you want to lump
exercise, feeding and light for-
- And sleep.
- And sleep in a way
that as a coherent and total system
makes you feel really good.
- Temporally in a great order.
- Uh uh.
- Absolutely.
- And I think that-
- And I could tell you to me
is literally getting exposed
to sun clearly in the morning,
clearly at noon, I go out,
I keep my windows in the
office completely open,
eating mostly in the early
time of the day and exercising.
And literally at the end part of the day,
I'm not really in a more
thoughtful vegetative state.
Like I really can't like after
5:00, I tell my students,
if you want to tell me
anything complicated,
you're wasting your time.
My brain just doesn't function.
So even though I only sleep at night,
but I'm really starting
to shut off, ramp down.
Really I mean, I could send email,
talk about brainless stuff, but my power,
my energy to do powerful stuff
really drop tremendously.
So all my students who know me very well,
they put the meetings with
me early in the morning
'cause they know this is when I'm...
So, everything for me and
for me, it's very tight.
So it could be different for...
It's very clustered in the morning.
It's all tied together.
And literally the remaining part
seems to be just a vegetative state.
- Mm hm.
Yeah, you and my bulldog, Costello,
who unfortunately passed away recently.
- Oh no.
- Yeah.
- I did not, that's so sad.
- Yeah, Samer and Costello
were good friends.
Yeah, sorry to break it to you here.
Yeah, he had a good long
life and he went easy,
but he had a circadian clock
that basically would just sleep
around 24 hours a day,
minimal activity interspersed
every third day or so.
You do have this morning vigor.
- Yes.
- And I think other people
are going to have more
of an afternoon vigor.
Do you think that this can
change across the lifespan?
The rumor is that teenagers
naturally want to sleep in later
and stay up later.
Do you think that's social rhythm?
Or do you think that
that's actually biological?
- Yeah, that's a tough question.
I mean, it could be both.
One thing that worries me is
that it seems that if anything,
with age this morning rigor gets stronger.
- You mean, you want people to become more
of morning people.
- More of morning people.
- Well, why does that worry you?
I think that's good.
- Because for me, I'm
already very shifted morning.
I don't want to be one of these 7:00 p.m.
to 1:00 a.m. sleepers at some point.
- On the other hand,
it's also kind of nice
because it's quiet and
you can get work done.
- Yeah, but honestly from 4:30 till 7:30
when my wife wake up, it can be very long.
Yes, you achieved a lot,
but it's quiet outside.
So, I don't want to be at 1:00
a.m., let's put it this way.
- You can tell Samer is
more social than I am.
- That's right, that is true.
- But we should touch on that actually.
So, your wife, she follows
a different schedule.
- Yeah.
- So, the social rhythm-
- I'm honestly...
- Is important I think.
What should we do?
How should we conceptualize
and how should we adjust
ourselves according to the social rhythm?
- And I honestly love this hypothesis
that people came up with and
Pat's kids reminded me of.
Because kids are really going to
disrupt your sleep-wake cycle,
it seems like there is
a chrono attraction.
That's usually people
who attract each others
have actually different
sleep-wake schedule.
And the idea being is
that this allows them
to take care of their kids
throughout the day-night cycle.
- And have a peaceful marriage.
- And have a peaceful
marriage in a way, right?
So, I mean, we didn't
have kids, me and Rejji.
So maybe this is, but it
seems like evolutionary
it makes sense that if you
want to protect your kids,
you don't want everybody
to be morning vigor,
and then the kids don't have.
So you want it distributed across.
I mean, it makes sense.
- It's a reasonable argument.
- Yeah.
- I've heard that one
of the reasons that people
think that the clock
is not exactly 24 hours,
but it's 24 hours plus or
minus 20 minutes or so,
is because we believe that we
evolved in clans or groups,
villages, whatever, that
were about 100 to 200 people.
And in order to have protection around
the early morning hours-
- Interesting, same idea.
- When we're vulnerable to predation
and in the late night hours,
that you would want some
individuals of our species
to be naturally more like night owls
and some more like early people.
So your theory of parenting
is similar in that way.
- Right.
- The social rhythm
is a powerful rhythm though.
Meaning if I go out and I'm tired,
let's say I'm tired at like 9:30.
I don't want to go out, like I'm to need-
- So can I just say something about that?
I think the social rhythm is
powerful at the obvious levels.
Like it affects your sleep,
it affects how much you wake up or eat,
but I'm not so sure it's
as powerful as people think
on the clock.
Now, eventually it will mess up the clock
because now if you're doing
a lot of social at night,
getting enough light, eating
at the wrong time of the day,
eventually you're going to have an effect,
but I don't think just the
social interactions themselves
have been shown to affect
your clock very strongly
for some reason.
- Yeah, that's good to know.
Well, for people hearing this,
they're probably getting the impression
like I'm the night owl,
and then Samer is the one
that's in bed at 9:00 and
then wakes up at 4:00.
But having attended many
meetings with Samer,
I can tell you that he's the party animal.
So let's talk about that.
I mean, let's talk about the
fact that you're the partier,
who's up until 2:00 dancing
at these various meetings,
which I've seen.
- Yep.
- He's actually a good dancer I'm told,
but what should we do when
we do stay up very late,
for whatever reason;
could be because we had
to take a midnight trip to the hospital,
an unfortunate reason,
or it could be because you're
in the presence of people
that you don't see very
often and you go out
for a really nice night out on
the town and you get to sleep
around 2:30 or 3:00 in the morning.
How should one get back on schedule?
Do you force yourself to
then get up and view light
at the normal time that you
would get up and view light?
Or do you allow yourself to sleep in?
What what's the optimal protocol?
- I would allow myself to sleep in,
and remember this is a long-term effect.
This is something that you
live with for a long period.
And remember I told you
about the experiments
we did with the mood,
these required two weeks
of that light schedule
to cause mood disturbances.
So these don't happen
just in a single day.
- So this is the way you
justify staying out late
every once in a while.
- Well, in the meetings
you've seen me in,
I've done this for five
or six days continuously,
but what you didn't see that
when I came back to my home,
it took me two weeks
as if I did a jet lag.
So I really do suffer for two weeks
after doing a six crazy
night of staying up at night,
drinking at the wrong time of the day.
So it's not that I'm
completely okay with it.
When I go back, everything goes back.
It takes me actually
literally two weeks to recover
from the circadian rhythm meeting
that you've seen me
partying at some point.
- Which is kind of ironic
that the circadian rhythm-
- I know.
- Meaning people are totally
disrupting their circadian cycle,
but scientists are human beings too.
- Right, so I think if you do
it at very little occasions,
I think you should not worry too much
that this will have lasting impact.
And the good news is that if
you readjust your schedule,
you could come back to it.
The problem is when you
maintain this wrong schedule
for a prolonged time
and it becomes chronic,
prolonged periods of time,
that's when you have the problems
and the accumulation of the problems.
So when you have sleeping problem,
you produce metabolic problem.
When you have metabolic problems,
you produce lack of exercise.
And you could see how things
can spiral out very quickly.
And then it would be
hard to come back to it.
- Well, certainly sleep disruption is both
a symptom of and-
- Yes.
- A cause of almost all-
- Absolutely.
- Mental health disorders.
- And certainly the metabolic syndromes
that people are talking about
nowadays and all of this,
it all funnels back to light.
This is what's so remarkable.
- Eventually, yeah.
- And so we have these devices,
and I use my phone and I use my computer.
But do you think that the
mere dimming of the screen
or not interacting with screens,
say 90 minutes or two
hours before bedtime,
according to what we're saying today,
this should have a profound effect
on all these factors.
- And it does.
And I really believe it does.
And, again, I think as
Pat did these inventions
where you get a pouch where
you put your phone in a pouch.
- Mm hm, so, what Samer's
referring to is our friend, Pat,
this former Seal Team member,
who's also very impressive
person in the landscape
of business and family, et cetera.
A real superhuman by any
regard has this habit of taking
his phone and putting
it into a sealed pouch
in the evening.
- Yeah.
- So it's basically walled off-
- And in his program he sends you actually
these sealed pouches.
And so that I think is a
great idea because not only
it will take away the light from you,
but it also take away the distraction
because you want to repair and
recover, and sleep does that.
And if you have your phone
dinging all the time,
or the light flashing from it,
you're just not getting enough sleep
and you're causing
yourself major problems.
- I never asked you
this, but I realized now
that I should have long
ago, but I'll ask you now.
Why and how did you get
into all this stuff?
- Yeah, I mean, honestly, first of all,
I wanted to study genetics and I knew
I wanted to do PhD in genetics.
But I only got accepted in
one university at the time.
And I joined the Learning and Memory Lab.
And I liked learning and
memory at the beginning,
I worked on the snails
on Aplysia californica,
and started looking at
learning and memory.
But then the same lab was
looking at these daily variation.
I was really struck.
Like you never think about
it outside of science.
It's really struck me that organisms
can measure day biologically.
That was very shocking to me.
And I just really got
attracted and I wanted to see
why does this happen?
What is the effect of
different times of day?
And I just stuck with it.
It just, it was mind blowing for me
who was in medical school,
that I've never heard about it before.
You know, it's really amazing medicine,
I think still now we are very good
at looking at stuff spatially,
but we're very bad at
looking at temporal aspects.
So we always like to see
images, static images,
spatial information.
- Right, take an x-ray,
measure a temperature-
- Yeah, exactly.
- Measure a blood pressure.
- But we don't think of temporal.
And you talk to John Hogenesch right now,
and he's telling you the
importance of chronomedicine
or chromo pharma...
Whatever the word is.
And it really just getting the drugs
at the right time of the
day is going to be essential
for our health.
- Do you think that's going to
come from using better trackers,
like Oura rings, WHOOP
straps, these kinds of things?
- I love the trackers,
but I think there's even
more exciting discoveries.
Now you could take a single blood sample
and measure many biological components
and figure where you are
in the circadian clock.
Something that was very hard to do before.
So if you have a marker to know
where you are in the clock,
you could actually understand
more the effect of everything;
exercise, feeding, light input.
- What is the marker?
- So there are some papers
from what's her name?
Phyllis Zee and from Achim Kramer
where they measure multiple RNAs
that are known to tell you
what phase of the clock is,
or multiple proteins or
biological reactions.
And depending on a combination of factors,
not a single factor,
you could tell where you
are in the circadian clock.
So they could instead of
just measuring temperature
or melatonin, just one measurement.
And melatonin specifically, is
also complicated by the fact
that melatonin is affected by light.
And temperature, your
temperature and sleep can be
easily dissociable, right?
When you travel up those
different timezone,
you sleep at different times
in the temperature cycle.
So having multiple components
measured will give you
a better determination
of your circadian phase,
and understanding your
circadian phase in humans
will telling you what is the
effect of giving certain drugs
at certain times of the circadian phase.
So, in the future, this
is going to be studied
at a much higher level when
you can determine the phase
in relation to all the other stuff.
- It's striking to me that in
all animals, besides humans,
if they deviate too much
from the appropriate exposure
to light and light-dark cycle,
they essentially don't mate and/or die
and/or get killed off.
But in humans, we are able
to override that at least
to some extent, but the ways
in which we suffer appear to be
things like obesity, metabolic syndromes,
reproductive syndromes that are accompany
the other syndromes, you
know, endocrine syndromes,
and mood and depressive disorders.
Is there any effort at the
level of the nationally
or laboratories that you're aware of
to try and use light in order
to improve mood and mental health?
- I mean, honestly, this is my mantra.
This is the thing that I think people,
because I say, don't take
a pill, take a photon.
And not, I mean, you take pills.
That's important.
I'm just making it that
really we have an opportunity
right now with the incredible
advances of LED lights,
of changing spectrum of light,
of regulating intensities.
And just for simple changes,
you could really improve
sleep-wake cycle, productivity,
and still you could actually get more done
because as we've talked about,
when you have all these messed up,
now you have to sleep more,
but your sleep is fragmented.
It's not very good.
- And you can't focus
when you do sit down-
- And you can't focus or
you don't have alertness
when you need the alertness.
So having all these could allow
you to do even more actually
at the end than less.
And that's the exciting part it.
- One of the questions I
get asked most often about
is about ADHD.
I think there's a lot of self-prescribed
as well as clinically prescribed ADHD.
People are having a tremendously
difficult time focusing
and not just because they're sleepy,
they just can't seem to
anchor their attention.
And there could be
multiple reasons for this,
but there are now several
clinical trials ongoing
using light to try and anchor
people's attention and mood
and wellbeing for sake of focus.
And I think that while I love this saying
that you mentioned, "Take
a photon, not a pill."
And with due respect to
the need for pharmacology
for some certain people,
I think most people just
haven't really dialed in
their relationship to light
in a way that allows them
to rule out whether or
not they need medication.
- Absolutely, absolutely.
That's the best way to put it.
I can't add to that.
- Let's talk about jet lag.
- Mm hm.
- But not in the context of,
okay, if somebody's traveling
from Europe to Japan
or from the east coast,
because that varies tremendously, right?
I mean, there's as many
different variations
on travel as there are
individuals out there with roles-
- Right.
- And jobs, et cetera.
But rather, let's talk
about what are the two
or three things that people can do
to adjust their schedule quickly?
Yesterday, I called you and said,
"Look, I know somebody
who's traveling six hours.
I won't even mention in which direction,
'cause I don't want people
to anchor to that example.
And you described some very
simple tools of viewing light
a little bit earlier than normal
and getting on the local
food schedule, et cetera,
that would allow them
to shift more quickly.
- Exactly.
- And the reason I want to
have this conversation is
yes, for the travelers,
and for the shift workers,
but mostly because of the
fact that you've proven
again and again that people are disrupted
in their circadian behavior at home.
So, aside from what we've
already talked about,
how can one adjust
quickly to a new schedule?
Like let's say, fall classes are starting,
you start a new job or you have a baby
or a puppy or whatever,
what is the best way
to shift the clock quickly?
- So, it's very simple as
we've talked yesterday.
So imagine you're in the outside
with no industrial light.
If your body thinks
you're in early evening
and you see a bright light,
what does this tell you?
Oh, wait, this is not early evening yet.
It's still early afternoon
or late afternoon.
So I have to delay my clock
to go back to late afternoon.
So if you get light early in the evening,
it delays your clock.
So what does that-
- Meaning that makes you
want to go to sleep later?
- Yes, it delays your clock.
So, you're in New York, right?
People in Italy have an advanced clock
because they are six hours ahead of us.
So if you're in New York
and you get light early
in the evening, you delay
even further from Italy.
So now you're delaying away from Italy.
Now the same thing happens.
Let's say, you thought dawn came up
and you thought it's already dawn,
but it was let's say three
o'clock in the morning
or four o'clock in the morning.
And then you get to
bright light and you say,
"Oh, wait a minute.
Dawn is not the up yet."
So I should advance my clock.
Or I'm at night, but I'm
getting bright lights,
so I should run because
dawn is already up.
So then later in the
night, later in your night,
and actually it just
happens that in humans
you get a temperature
nadir later in the night,
low temperature in your body.
After that, lights start
advancing your clock.
So if you want to go to Italy,
instead of getting light
early in the evening,
you want to get light
after the temperature low.
So you could advance your clock
even before you go to Italy,
and you're catching up to the
Italians just by using light.
It's as simple as that.
- Great.
- So you could do it for every region.
You could calculate how much
they are advanced of you.
You could know how much these
light shifts happen per day,
and you can calculate what you need to do,
very simple math, to adjust
either in direction of delaying
if you're going from
New York to California,
you want to delay your clock
or advancing if you're going
from New York to Italy.
- So, in order to make that a visual
and because a lot of people
are listening to this,
not looking at it on video,
we will put a zero cost
downloadable figure of this
on the HubermanLab.com website
related to this episode.
But I think I can summarize
it in language as well.
If I understand correctly,
what you're saying is if
your typical wake up time
is say, 7:00 a.m., then your
low point in temperature
probably occurs somewhere
around 5:00 a.m..
- Yeah.
- And if you view light
right around then it's
going to essentially
advance your clock.
- Yeah.
Because then your body thinks,
oh, it's seven o'clock,
so advanced your clock
by one to two hours.
- But if I were to view
light, say at 3:00 a.m.,
then it would probably delay my clock?
- Yeah.
- Okay.
Yeah, so, and then let's say
I land in a new schedule.
I want to adjust to a new schedule.
Let's say I didn't manage to do anything
with my light viewing before I went.
And I didn't anticipate the trip.
Suddenly I'm on a new schedule, okay?
I was told that one of the
ways to help shift the clock
and to avoid gastrointestinal issues
is to eat on the local schedule.
- Mm hm.
- To start basically behaving
like a local.
- Mm hm.
- Even though your
circadian clock will take
a little bit of time to catch up.
- Right, absolutely.
But you have to remember the light, right?
So, now that we explained it very simply,
let's take a very simple example, right?
New York to Italy,
that's a simple example.
New York time, Italy time,
six hour difference, right?
So let's say you fly
from New York at night.
You reach Italy at eight
o'clock in the morning.
What is the time in your
New York time although you-
- Six hours back.
- It's 2:00 in the morning.
- It's 2:00 a.m..
So when you land Italy,
you want to avoid light like the plague.
Yeah, you could eat,
but you really don't
want to get the light.
- Right, 'cause otherwise
it's going to delay you.
- It's going to delay you, it's
going to send you to California
instead of sending you to Italy.
- Right, and so this is such a key point.
If anyone's confused about this,
we will put some diagrams up.
But what Samer is saying is so crucial.
Just because getting
bright light in your eyes
early in the day is really
beneficial when you're at home,
when you travel to a new time zone,
you have to take into account
what your body thinks.
Excuse me, you have to
take into account where
your body thinks you are.
- Exactly.
- And so if you're looking
at the Italian sunrise,
having just flown from New York to Italy
and you didn't prepare
for that trip by waking up
a little bit earlier in anticipation-
- Multiple days, yeah.
- And you view light
at 6:00 or 7:00 a.m. Italian time,
beautiful Italian sunrise,
you are going to delay your clock.
You're going to basically throw
yourself back to California,
but you are in Italy.
You're going to throw your
biology back to California
and you are going to be up in
the middle of the Italian night.
And you're going to be miserable-
- Miserable.
- I'll tell a brief anecdote
'cause I called Samer in desperation.
A few years ago, I traveled to Abu Dhabi,
NYU Abu Dhabi to give a
seminar, 12 hours out of phase.
It's a 12 hour flip.
And I thought I could just muscle it.
I thought I'll get up, just view sunlight
when the sun comes up and I fell apart
mentally and physically.
And Samer came to my rescue.
I called him, I said, "I
don't know what to do."
And he said, "Go to the
gym at the local dawn,
workout, eat and then view
sunlight starting the next day."
And that basically got me on the schedule.
So I used food and
exercise to adjust myself
because my light viewing activity
was just completely out of whack.
- Yeah, I mean, and we
talked about other details,
so you have to calculate it,
but you're absolutely right.
I mean, it's very
important to avoid getting
the wrong light information
when you're trying
to adjust your body because
otherwise it shifts you
to the other cycle, absolutely right.
- Well, you are one of these
people that has such vigor.
It's one of these things
where having known you
all these years, you have a
tremendous capacity for work
and for soccer, and for
arguing, respectful arguing.
And sometimes, you know-
- It's getting worse with age.
- Yeah, well, we could
talk about that offline,
but I think a lot of your
vigor and a lot of your ability
to work hard and focus and
really do so many things
at an impressive level is
because you think about
these issues and you think about
when you're going to be optimal for focus,
when you're going to be
optimal for exercise,
and the when is the key.
- Right.
- And I think a lot of
people live in the landscape
of feeling like there's
something broken inside them
because they can't focus-
- It's subconscious.
- Or they get too-
- It's subconscious, right?
Remember it's all subconscious.
These effects and, Andrew,
you're absolutely right.
Now, honestly, joking aside about age,
I really agree with you that
I think part of the reason
I'm continuing to be able to do this,
that I really think about it.
And I make sure that I
keep everything aligned.
And that actually helps me a lot.
Like I don't suffer in sleep.
I don't suffer in waking up.
I never use a timer to wake up.
I mean, people say, aren't you scared?
Like you have to give a
lecture at 8:00 or 7:30.
Honestly, I was like, there is no way
I'm going to go beyond that.
It just, even if I try,
I can't sleep beyond 6:00
a.m. in my regular times,
it's just, it's not going to happen.
By 4:30 my eyes are wide
awake and I'm in bed.
It's just system is so aligned, it works.
- A lot of times people will
say, how come I go to sleep,
I fall asleep fine, but then
I wake up at 3:00 or 4:00
in the morning and can't fall back asleep.
Is it possible that those
people were supposed
to go to bed at 8:00 p.m.?
- It's possible.
I mean, it is possible.
It is also possible that
sometimes people will wake up
and go back to sleep.
But yeah, I mean, it is possible.
Or it's possible that their
clock is completely misaligned,
that they are getting
maybe a nap time at night
when they are supposed...
And then they possibly
feel so sleepy in the day.
So, all these are possible combination.
- Well, that's an interesting
idea I hadn't considered.
So, that what they think is their sleep,
their body is so out of whack
with the light-dark cycle,
that it's actually a nap.
- A nap.
Or the weaker part of the sleep.
I mean, you see this when you traveled
to different time zone before you adjust.
You go to sleep really well,
but two hours later, you're fully up.
Two hours.
If you were so tired and
this is your regular sleep,
there's no way you're going
to wake up in two hours.
So, then you feel very
sleepy later in the day
or something like that.
So it depends of how your whole system
is aligned to the environment.
- That's a very interesting idea.
I think that's going to
resonate with a lot of people.
I wake up every morning
around 3:00 or 4:00,
I generally use the bathroom
and then I fall back asleep very deeply.
It doesn't seem to disrupt
my daytime wakefulness.
And I think a lot of people
obsess over that waking up
and worry there's something wrong.
- Absolutely.
- Provided they can go back
to sleep it's okay.
- Exactly.
If you can go use the
bathroom, go back to sleep,
that should not be a problem.
Maybe with some people, when
they go to use the bathroom,
they use very bright light and then
they get an alerting signal.
So, maybe it could be as simple
as that, that affects you.
Maybe when you wake up,
you put tons of light
or you start reading your iPad.
So there's all these combination
that we still don't know
about that could be affecting
their sleep-wake rhythms
and their sleep maintenance.
- Do you take melatonin?
- I don't need it to be honest.
In my case, there is no reason to use it
because I could guarantee you
that by maybe eight o'clock,
my melatonin has already started to go up.
And by the time I sleep,
my melatonin is very high
because I don't use a lot
of lights after sunset.
- And light inhibits melatonin release.
- And light really blocks melatonin level.
- You hear this myth that
the pineal gland calcifies
as we get older.
Do you know anything about that?
- I mean, I've heard about
that, but I don't know...
I mean, there is not very clear evidence
that it affects the sleep.
I don't know much about it, to be honest.
- Yeah, the evidence that
I've seen is that yes,
there's some calcification
around the pineal,
just because of where
it sits in the brain.
It's close to some bony structures.
- I see.
- But I don't think
there's any evidence that
it has negative effects.
- I mean, if you still have,
you could measure melatonin
and that should tell you
if it has any, it's such
an easy thing to do.
- Yeah, I think this is more
of a internet wellness thing
that got outside the cage.
- That's possible.
I think you're absolutely right.
- Yeah, it sounds terrible, calcification
of the thing, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
Like the heart thing, right?
Let's talk about seasonality a little bit.
I learned, and I don't
know if this is still true,
but that most suicides occur
in April, in the spring.
I think there's a poem that says,
"April is the cruelest month,"
I think as the poem begins.
Are there data that
suicides are more frequent
at particular times of year?
And if so, is the spring
that time of year?
- Yeah, a lot of people talk about this.
And one of the hypothesis
is that the winter month
that are very bad for mood,
make people not wanting to do anything.
And they get into such
deep level of depression
that when the sun comes up,
they get actually the energy
to act on their depression,
which sounds really terrible.
And it's just terrible.
- Sounds just terrible.
It's terrible.
- So that's the idea
that the lack of light
throughout the winter
caused them to go into such depression
that they don't feel like doing anything.
Then when the light comes
in with rigor in the spring,
it gives them that after all
the depression they suffered,
it gives them that push to take
that sad, final act I guess.
- What other seasonal effects have been
demonstrated in humans?
- Yeah, I mean, I think in
humans, it's not very clear
because we don't think about seasonality,
but if you start thinking about us,
I think we go through
major seasonal changes.
I really do.
I think our eating pattern
changed across the year.
I could tell you that
me thinking about this,
there is a clear changes that
happens to me across the year.
But for animals, this is really essential
because for animals they have
to time their mating behavior
was when they deliver their
progeny in the most abundant
amount of food and artificial light
is causing major disruption.
Because if you change
the way these animals
are receiving the light information,
they either start mating
much earlier or much later
and their numbers dwindle.
And they get into the
dangers of really completely
getting eliminated or extinct.
- Well, human birth rates
are definitely going down.
- Right, in some-
- I mean, in the US
in particular, yeah.
- In some areas, not others.
- Not others, right.
But are there other effects
of seasonality on humans
that we are aware of?
- Honestly, you could see it perfectly,
I think, in Scandinavia,
I mean, you could talk
to people who live in-
- Sure, they get seasonal depression.
- Well, seasonal depression is one,
but actually when you start
asking them questions,
they tell you like in the winter
they barely could wake up.
They barely have the energy,
before even depression.
Even people who don't
get seasonal depression,
they will tell you our
energy level is lower.
Our ability to go to work is not the same.
And in the summer, most people
actually sleep very little.
They tell you, we really
can feel like we're manic,
we have all this energy
and not in a negative way,
in a funny way, right?
I mean, but if we want to sleep,
we have to put this curtain.
And I think in these situations,
you could really appreciate
the seasonality of humans.
I think we kind of
destroyed our seasonality
because we don't get exposed
to that much natural light.
We have all this artificial
light, but I think honestly,
one of the thing that is going to happen
if they follow your
recommendations about giving light
at the same time, giving
food, giving exercise-
- Wait, let's be clear, those
are your recommendations.
- Well, I mean-
- No, I mean just
in fair attribution.
- What I'm saying is that
this is going to cause them
to also experience some
changes across the season,
because now they're going
to see the sun differently.
If you're going to go out in
the morning in the summer,
you're going to get a much brighter...
That's why I don't like
the change in time.
I know people think, oh,
because you're biased,
'cause I think-
- Wait, wait, wait, wait.
Sorry, the change in time,
are you talking about daylight savings?
- Daylight savings.
It's such a bad idea because it disrupts
that rhythm that you're having.
'Cause I think your body,
if you keep that rhythm,
you will see the whole seasonality.
And I look at it from a different
aspect than other people.
And people say I'm biased
because I'm a morning person,
and it may be true, but
there are situation-
- Secret conspiracy about morning people.
- Yeah, but if you think about it, Andrew,
there is a situation
where you're getting light
perfectly well and then all of a sudden
they delayed by one hour because...
And then even though it's the summer,
your body now, if you're
still not adjusting think,
"Oh wait, what happened?
What kind of happened?"
- Well, I'm glad you're bringing this up
because I always thought
what's the big deal, one hour?
Right, one hour shift.
Spring forward, fall back.
- It's so hard to adjust
to one hour actually.
- But this goes back to the
beginning of our discussion.
It's not just one hour.
- Right.
- Because it's one hour
across that one day.
- Right.
- But there's this cumulative
effect on the clock and
these three elements
of your tripartite model.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Right, the homeostatic,
sleep and the light,
direct effects on mood.
- Exactly and when
it's so close, it's
sometimes hard to figure out
how to adjust it perfectly because
we're already sleep
deprived in our society.
And then you shift it by...
So it just, it all accumulates
and it has no benefit.
- Well, you work at a major
government organization,
National Institute of Mental Health.
- Yeah.
- Why don't we campaign for-
- Honestly, I have no idea.
I mean, it makes no sense.
- No, I'm saying why don't we go campaign?
- Yeah, I would love to.
I mean, it makes no sense
to have the summer light
goes up at 9:00 p.m.,
the light goes down where I
live in Baltimore at 9:00 p.m.
And then all of a sudden,
when you really want to see
the light longer in the day,
you now shift the other way.
And now it goes all of
a sudden at 6:00 p.m..
Why do you do these drastic changes?
Let it blend across the
whole season, you know?
Yes, later, earlier at night,
but it's at least consistent.
It goes in a very consistent manner.
I just don't understand why they do this.
It makes no sense.
- Well, I think that the reason they do it
is because they don't
understand the biology.
- Exactly, absolutely.
- Because one hour seems
trivial unless you understand-
- It's not.
- That the repercussions
of that one hour shift,
because what's also clear now
based on what you're saying,
is that that one hour shift
taking you out of alignment
with the natural light-dark cycle
in exactly the wrong direction.
- It's pushing people to get even later.
- Yeah.
- In the summer,
when light is going to
push you later anyway.
It doesn't make sense.
You put it beautifully, I just
rambled and this is really-
- No, no, you made it clear.
- I mean, it's like
literally it it made people
who are having problem having
an advanced sleep rhythm
because they are delayed,
now you give them this hour to
make them even more delayed.
You push them even later
in the day-night cycle.
It just doesn't make sense at all.
- I think 2022 should be the year that we
abolish daylight savings.
- Oh, man.
That would be the day for me honestly.
- Well, also, if it has a positive effect
on what is essentially an
epidemic of mental health issues
and other issues related
to improper interactions
with light, that I think
is a well worthwhile cause,
and we can explore it.
- Absolutely, absolutely.
- [Andrew] So for once we're
going to fight with another group.
- Common, I would do to do that.
- [Andrew] A common battle as
opposed to with one another.
- I mean, the circadian people honestly,
to give them credit, have
been trying for years
to abolish daylight saving.
- Yeah, the problem is they
all go to sleep at 9:00 p.m.
and wake up at 4:00 a.m.,
so we never see them.
- That's right, that's right.
- No, the circadian community
has done an amazing job
of figuring out what we need.
- Right.
- And then the challenge of course,
is making sure that
people get what they need.
- Right.
- And making sure
that at a societal level,
we're not vaulting ourselves
into the wrong direction.
- And the biggest problem
is that the late waking
people, they think that really,
and I'm going to try to
put it in a better way now,
they think, oh, because
you're a morning person,
you want to see the sun early.
So you want me to suffer it dropping late,
but that's not the case.
Because what happens is
when they shift it back
after the daylight saving,
now they're going to make
you suffer really badly
because now it's going to be earlier.
- Right, in the fall.
- In the fall when there
is not enough light.
- Yeah, that's right.
- And they keep it the same way.
So to try to convince them
that actually this at the end
causes more trouble
when you need the light
for your late schedule in the fall,
when they shift it back.
Then they say, keep it
daylight saving all the time.
And that has been proven
that it's very bad.
Like people have done studies
that literally two areas
close to each others and
areas that were the whole year
on daylight saving has much more problems
even in cancer rates and depression.
So you don't want to do that.
So that's what trying to convince people
that you need to prevent that switch,
and you don't need daylight saving at all.
That's where the problem happens.
- Interesting.
I had not thought about that, but yes,
you late risers that in the
fall, when it's the fall back,
as they say, spring forward, fall back,
you dial back the clock,
it's really compounding the problem
that already exists.
- Exactly.
And it's really nice if you think,
if you keep it consistent in the spring,
you get the equinox and then
the day starts going up,
and then even in the
summer it start going down,
and then the fall you get the
other equinox and go back.
So it's very symmetrical, right?
It goes into short day,
longer, long, long, long, long,
and then short day again.
But now you're getting
these bumps in both sides
of the spring and fall.
Why would you do that?
Something that is beautifully symmetrical,
beautifully smooth, you're
putting bumps into it.
- Well, and not just
beautiful because it's there,
but it evolved.
I mean, essentially this is the system-
- It's natural.
- We evolved in for hundreds
of thousands of years.
- This is the seasonality.
The most even apart
from the exact equator,
every part of the earth has seasonality.
- I want to briefly touch
on something which is
individual and genetic variation
in the sensitivity to light.
- Yeah.
- So not chronotype, but first of all,
a very basic question.
Do people with light
eyes, light colored eyes,
are they more sensitive
to light than people
with darker pigmented eyes?
- I mean, honestly, it makes
sense they will be more
because if you think of my dark pupil,
it's blocking more light.
So, if you have light pupil,
yes, for vision, it may
not be very obvious,
but for something that is
measuring the amount of light,
you're getting more light than me.
So you would probably need
less light to be effective
as somebody who's darker.
And that maybe could explain
why sometimes lighter people
say, I don't want to go
into very bright conditions
because it's really bright.
- Yeah, I can't even
be at a cafe with one of
these reflective tables,
like a metal table.
- Right.
- Unless I have very dark sunglasses on.
- Exactly.
- It's so bright
it's painful for me.
- Right, right.
- Whereas some people like
you, we've sat outside
and had meals and you're like fine.
I assumed it was kind of
Jordanian toughness versus-
- No, no, no, it's really
the pupil blocks more light.
So I think it is possible that
it's as simple as the pupil
blocking more light can have sensitivity,
but your question is also goes deeper.
Are there more sensitivity differences?
And my understanding would be
I would think that it may be,
depends on how effective your cells
are in responding to light,
how healthy your ipRCGs are.
But there's not many studies to show that.
What is really clear that is happening
is that patients with bipolar,
they seem to have different
sensitivities to light.
So it seems that at least people
who have psychological changes,
they may have differences to
the sensitivity of light, so.
- Are those differences
in a particular direction?
- I don't remember the exact data.
- We can look it up, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
- And people have heard
me say this at nauseum
to the point where they
actually roll their eyes,
but that these are the
only two pieces of brain,
I'm pointing to my eyes, folks,
that are outside the cranial vault.
- Absolutely.
- They are two pieces of brain
that it basically inform
the brain about whether
or not to be alert or asleep.
- Absolutely.
- But you can imagine that
those two little pieces of brain
that we call eyes would
have genetic variations.
- Right.
- Of course eye color
is genetically determined,
that there would be
genetic variations based on
whether or not your ancestry
evolved near the equator
or further from the equator, right?
I mean, you see more
blue eyes in Scandinavia,
than you do at the equator.
- Absolutely, I mean,
it's the lack of light that
said you need less inhibition
because there's not enough light, right?
So that's the idea of the changing color.
So, yeah, I totally agree with you.
I mean, I think this is an
area that will be studied later
and will be empirically determined.
The problem we have in
this field right now,
which I think is the biggest problem,
is we don't have a way
to measure the ipRCGs
sensitivities in humans.
So we still like, it's easy to measure
your rod cone function if
you go to an optometrist,
they measure all the details, right?
Contrast detection.
- You look at the chart,
you get out the Snellen Chart.
- Yeah, exactly.
- You look at the letters of the DMV.
- Yeah.
- But for the non subconscious,
we still don't have a good
measuring systems to figure out
what is Andrew's sensitivity?
What is Samer's sensitivity?
What is this person's sensitivity?
And I think we're starting to
work on something like that
to hopefully develop these techniques.
But till we develop them,
it's going to be very hard to figure out
if there is a sensitivity difference?
How do they relate?
And on men and woman?
Dark and light?
And all that, normal versus
psychologically affect,
and stuff like that.
- Fascinating.
And every time you talk, I learn so much.
It's in the best way, the
best sense of the term,
it's a waterfall of knowledge.
As a final question,
I have a question about
sensitivity of a whole other kind,
and that's the sensitivity to spicy food.
Now, the reason I'm asking this question,
what seemingly out of the blue
is that I made the mistake
once of having Samer cook for me.
And I said, "Not too spicy."
And he said, "Okay, not too spicy."
He actually said, "Okay, not too spicy."
And it almost killed me.
Like it was like two or three days.
So you know a lot about biology
outside the visual system,
light, et cetera.
You've been around a while.
Are there known genetic
or inherited of any kind
sensitivities to spicy food?
To things like red peppers and capsaicin?
Because what you call mild, my friend,
almost put me into the hospital.
- I think this is similar
to you swimming in the ocean
and I need to go develop
the pain tolerance to do it.
- Okay, true, true, I
like cold water swims
and Samer's not a fan.
- Yeah.
- But that's going to change.
It's adaptable.
- These are adaptable.
- That's going to change.
- That's my belief.
Before I met Rejji, I was like you.
And once I started eating
a lot of spicy food,
I lost touch of how spicy my food is.
So I nearly killed you, Andrew,
and I apologize for that.
- I forgive you.
So, basically what you're
saying is that marriage
toughened you up?
- Toughened me up, exactly.
- [Andrew] Maybe that's the solution.
- That's what you need, yeah.
- Samer, this has been an amazing march
through the importance of light,
not just for regulating
sleep and wakefulness,
but also for food timing,
the interactions with mood,
the interactions with exercise.
I'm certain that people are
going to start thinking about
how to change their
relationship with light
as a way to anchor
everything that they do.
And that's important to their health.
And I just on behalf of all of them,
and just directly from me as your friend
and as a colleague for many
years now, I just want to say,
thank you for the
incredible work you're doing
and for sharing it with us.
- Thank you so much.
And I actually now thinking
about all of this, and you said,
I should write a book.
I should write a book and call
it "The Tripartite Model."
I think that would put all
these components together,
it would be very interesting
to do at some point.
- You should write a book.
They'll probably try and
change the title to like,
"Food, Mood and You," or something.
But you can put in little
print The Tripartite Model
or whatever, but regardless
of what it's called,
you absolutely should write a book.
And so if you'd like
Samer to write a book,
or if you'd like to learn more about him,
let's talk a little bit about
where people can find you.
Your laboratory is at
the National Institutes
of Mental Health.
He is Head of the Chronobiology Unit,
all these things as
I've mentioned earlier,
but you are active on
Twitter and Instagram.
- Right.
- So, what is your
Twitter handle?
- It's @SamerHattar.
- And we will provide a link
for that in the show notes.
- Yes, the Twitter @SamerHattar,
and I think the same for Instagram.
Yeah, actually.
- And Samer has been
coaxed onto Instagram, so he
does post from time to time,
mostly pictures of food
that is incredibly spicy,
but also information about chronobiology.
He comes on for an
Instagram Live every once
in a while with me.
So, definitely give him a
follow there and on Twitter.
And I'm sure that he'll be
happy to answer questions
and entertain any and all
discussions about chronobiology.
- Absolutely, yeah.
And light, yeah.
- Great, thank you, Samer.
- Awesome, thank you, Andrew.
- Thank you for joining
me for my conversation
with Dr. Samer Hattar.
I hope you found it as interesting
and informative as I did.
If you're enjoying this podcast
and/or learning from it,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
In addition, please leave
us comments and feedback
in the comments section on YouTube.
A great thing to do there
would be to make suggestions
about future topics you'd like us to cover
or future guests you'd like me to host
on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
In addition, please
subscribe to our podcast
on Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you can leave
us up to a five star review.
Please also check out the
sponsors that we mentioned
at the beginning of the podcast.
That's a terrific way to support us.
And we have a Patreon, it's
patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
And there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
For those of you that are interested
in supporting scientific research,
you can support the research
in my laboratory on stress,
on sleep, and human performance
and other related topics,
by going to
HubermanLab.stanford.edu/giving.
And there you can make a
tax deductible donation
at any level that you like.
If you're not already
following us on Instagram,
please follow us @HubermanLab on Instagram
and also on Twitter.
Both those places I teach neuroscience
and offer information
that's not always covered
on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[light music]